One
Encounter  with  Adiitu-Olodumare
My  friends  of all ages  and  sexes:  young  school  children  and  my 
older  friends,  our male-folks  and our  women,  the black  people  
of the world  and the white  people  too, people  of other  races  
and colours.  This  event  took  place  on a day such  as this.  Ah! A 
mighty  day  it was.
Ah! the rain was very heavy.  We were driving  in a 
saloon  car when  a heavy  downpour  began.  The rain  began  to 
pound  drums  on our  heads;  its rhythm  was  very  like  the sound  
of omele  on dundun  drums.  At some  point  we heard  a great  
rumbling  on the right  side.  At another  point,  we heard  a great  
rumbling  on the left. There  was a heavy  thud  in the front  and 
there  was another  heavy  rhapsody.  The sky was indigo-dark  
and  the front  was  white  as if Almighty  God  prepared  a powder  
of silver  and poured  it on the earth  from  heaven.  The wiper  
blade  cleaned  the screen  so much  that  it got  fed up with  wiping  
the screen.  Its strength  waned  and it gave up the task of 
cleaning  the screen.
The car was hurtling  in and out of the potholes  on the 
road.  The tyres  were  loose  and wobbling  on the road.  What  of 
the pedestrians  on the road?  The water  had formed  tents on 
their bodies,  clinging  tightly  to their skins. Clean  and pure  
streams  had become  red like troubled  mud. Green  allure
1


leaves  had turned  to dirtied  sight.  Fishes  had dived  into the 
bottom  of the rivers.  Animals  cringed  in the forest,  weather-  
bitten.  Birds  sat in hushed  forms  in their  nests.  Floods  chased  
snakes  out of their warm  holes.  Pythons  wandered  on the 
surface  of the river. Every living thing was in a state of 
discomfort.  Only  the earthworm sauntered  in great  pleasure,
unruffled.
The downpour  became  quite heavy and hence,  
visibility  became  very poor for the driver  to continue.  In the 
end, he removed  the key from  the ignition  of the car, stepped  
on the brakes  and the car came  to an abrupt  stop.  We began  to 
look  at one another.
As we wound  up the glasses  of the car in absolute  
silence,  a man  suddenly  began  to knock  at the sides  of the car. 
He knocked  once and knocked  a second  time. At the third
knocking,  we opened  the door  and  looked  outside.
We were faced  with a handsome  man. Such  beauty  I 
had hardly  beheld  in all my life. As soon as we peeped  out 
through  the wound-down  windows,  the rain stopped  for a 
while.  But before  we could  talk to the gentleman,  the driver  
had  started  the engine  of the car and  sped  off. After  a few  yards  
of driving,  I ordered  the driver  to stop  so that  we could  listen  to 
what  the man  had  to say.
The man came  to us the very moment  we signaled  to 
him to come.  As soon  as he arrived,  he looked  at me intently  
and  started  to laugh.  'Son  of Beyioku,  open  the door  of your  car 
for me to enter.  I have  been  sent  to you.  In fact,  I am on my way
to your  house.'
I opened  the door immediately  because,  as I said, the
man  was  extremely  handsome.  I became  drawn  to him  as soon  
as I saw  him.  He was tall and  light-complexioned.  He was not
2 


unduly  fat but he had the built  of an average  man. His head  
was  not too big and  his back  was  not as rough  as the back  of the 
tortoise  and his neck was long in moderation  and it was 
certainly  not as long  as that  of the ostrich.  Yet, it was as short  as 
that  of the cat. All the parts  of his body,  including  the arms  and 
the feet, fit well into each other. His skin was not as 
complicated  as that of a masquerade.  It was fresh,  cool and 
radiant  like  the skin  of a damsel.  But for the fact  that  he did not 
plait  his hair,  did  not knot  wrapper  like a woman,  did not  wear  
eye-lashes  nor manicure  his nails,  but that he did not carry  a 
handbag  and did not cat-walk  like a self-conscious  modern  
day lady, we would  have mistaken  the man for a woman.  I 
have  seen  people  with  sets  of white  teeth  in my days,  but  I have  
never  seen  any  as white  as those  of this  man.
Since  I have  been  seeing  tongues  on the roof  of people's  
mouths,  I have  never  seen  a tongue  as clean  and  reddish  as that 
of this man which  appeared  as if food had never journeyed  
through  it to the stomach.  Since  I have  been  beholding  clear­
sighted  eyes,  I have  never  seen  eyes  as bright  and crystal  clear  
as those  of this man.  He spoke  and  made  speaking  a delightful  
art. He walked  with such gait and grace that gained  the 
admiration  of all who  saw  him  walk. He wore  clothes  like one 
on a beauty  pageant.  Clean  nostrils,  moderate  arm-length,  
fitting  phalanges,  and beautiful  toes, all set this man apart  
from  the rest of mankind.  He was a man  in a class  of his own.  I 
don't  think  my mother  ever  encountered  his type,  or my father  
either  before  they  departed  this world.  Here was a man  of an 
average  height,  one not of the height  of a man on stilts.  This  
was the man  that I encountered  on the road  who asked  me to 
drive  him  around.
3 

My friends,  we would  not have  picked  him,  but since  I 
was going  home  and since  he had said  that  he was  heading  for 
my house,  we had  no option  but to take  him along.  Besides  the 
few exchanges  that  we had  when  we picked  him,  it was  a silent  
journey  to my  house.
I developed  goose  pimples  before  we got home.  I was 
used  to people  coming  to my house  to narrate  the story  of their  
lives. I suspected  this might  just be another  of that kind. In 
truth,  as soon as I arrived  home  and exchanged  pleasantries  
and  we sat in the courtyard,  he asked  if I had  writing  materials  
in the house  as he had a long story  to tell me, which  I must  
document  for posterity.  I asked  him, 'How  long is the story  
going  to be?' He retorted,  'It will be very long indeed',  'How  
very long', I urged  rather  anxiously.  He answered  without  
blinking,  'It is a story  that will form a whole  book',  he said,  
wearing  a wry  smile .
'Now,  I am scared.  That one should  be running  away  
from  trouble  and trouble  is in hot pursuit  of one. One  wants  to 
stay quiet but words  flow effortlessly  from one's reluctant  
mouth.  That  one wants  to remain ignorant  and knowledge  is 
racing  after  one. My life is in your  hand, Lord.'This  was  what  I 
said aloud,  thinking  that I was alone, speaking  to myself,  
forgetting  that I was with  the stranger  and in the presence  of 
the whole  world!  When  I then  lifted  up my face and  I found  the 
man  actively  present, I was ashamed of  myself  and I began  to 
find  waffle  words  to cover  my earlier  slip in order  to restore  my 
integrity  before my visitor.  I did not want to leave the 
impression  with my visitor  that I was a vain person.  'My 
friend,  please  go on with  your  story.  I am all ears.'
The man then answered  me saying,  'Now, do you 
remember  your dream  of the night of the sixteenth  day
4 







spanning  the morning  of the seventeenth  day of the seventh  
month  of the year nineteen  hundred  and fifty eight after the 
death  of our Lord?'  I became  genuinely  afraid  as I recalled  that 
it was that same  day that I had this great  and dreadful  dream  
and I narrated  the dream  to only a single  soul in the whole  
world.  That  was my most  trusted  friend  and I doubt  that he 
would  ever  have  revealed  it to anybody.  Yet, I documented  the 
dream  in a small  book.
On that  night,  I had  a sudden  dream  in which  my father,  
who  had  died,  who  had  crossed  many  rivers,  who  had  bade  the 
world  farewell,  suddenly  appeared  to me from  a very  mighty  
house.  His  body  has transformed  completely  into  that  of a very  
young  child  indeed.  He saw  me and called  me as he used  to call 
me when  he was on earth  and commanded  me to follow  him.  
We entered  another  big house.  As soon as we got inside  the 
house,  I began  to see many  of our household  people  who  had 
passed  on. I saw my elder sister who died long before  my 
father  died. I saw my younger  brother  and sister  who died  
when  my father  was still alive.  I saw my maternal  uncle  who  
was a hunter.  I saw my senior  brother  who was both a 
politician  and an eminent  person  within  the Christendom.  I 
beheld  them  all. Then,  my  father  began  to speak  thus:
My  son, my son, my beloved  son. My  heart  has remained  with 
you since  I left you on earth.  I want  you to bring  these  words  
to fulfillment  when  the time comes.  Do not  forget  that I have 
left the world  of misery.  I have departed  from the world  of 
travails  and troubles.  I have  left your  dangerous  world  behind  
me.
I am in the spirit  world  here, a world  in which  no one 
needs to work before eating. There is no story of planted
5






plantain  that yields  no fruit. There  is no despair about  poor 
yield  from  the cocoyam  here. There  is no anxiety  at dawn.  But 
my son, you are of the world.  You will tarry  there for  a long 
time  yet before  you  join me on this side of the  firmament.  I am 
speaking  to you through  the medium  of dreams.  Look at the 
man standing  on your  right  hand. Look at him very closely.
Take  note  of  him very  well because  he will come  to see you one 
day and  reveal  to you what  those  of  us on this side  want  you to 
do. He too is of the  flesh  my son. Ah, my son. Commend  me to 
your  younger  siblings.
Those  were  the words  of my father  which  came  to me in 
a dream.  It was  after  I recalled  the dream  and  took  another  look  
at the man that I recalled  that it was this same  man that my 
father  revealed  to me in my dream.  That  was how  the strange  
thing  occurred.  I do not recall  any story  where  two different  
people  experienced  exactly  the same  dream.  Yet,  this  man  and  I 
had the same dream.  As I narrated  my dream  the man was 
nodding  as if to say  he too remembered  the dream  every  step  of 
the way. He too had seen me as I had seen him. When  I was 
done  with  my  narration,  he then  took  over  like  this:
I am Adiitu-Olodumare  from  the town  of Ilakose.  My father  is 
Obiri-Aiye  and  my mother's  name  is Iponjudiran.'
This  is how  far I can write  the story  word  for word  as he 
told it in his own language.  He moved  so rapidly  from one 
episode  to another  that I decided  to pack  up the business  of 
reporting  it verbatim.  I asked  him  to go on telling  his story  and 
that,  at the end of it all, I will write  it down  in my own  words  
and  in my own  language.  This  is the man's  story;
6





Two

Obiri-Aiye and Iponjudiran

Do you  know  how  really  poor  a person  can  be? For one to be so 
poor  that on any day he cannot  boast of having  a single  kobo.  
That  one can be so poor that his clothes  are more  ragged  than  
shredded  banana  leaves,  that from  morning  till night  a man  
cannot  afford  to drink  water.  A man  could be so poor  that he 
competes  with  chickens  in picking  corns  from  the ground  so he 
can cook  them as a meal  to eat; a man  becomes  so poor  that  he 
peels  the back  of yam to pound  to eat as pounded  yam;  for a 
man to go into the incinerator  to seek discarded  crumbs  of 
bread;  for another man to finish  eating  cooked beans  and the 
other  one goes  to scrape  the bottom  of the pot with  bare  nails  to 
pick the burnt remains;  for a man to become  a beggar  in 
somebody  else's  kitchen;  for a man  to have  a single  underwear  
as his sole clothing;  for a woman  to have  an inner  skirt  as the 
only  item  of clothing;  that  one can  be so poor  that  he/she  cannot  
buy a common  sponge  to bath;  to be so poor  to be considered  a 
mad person;  abandoned  by neighbours  and deserted  by 
intimate  friends.  It is the kind of poverty  that denies  one of a 
roof over one's  head;  one wakes  up in deep  thoughts,  speaks  
with  bitterness;  to walk  like a corpse  in the midst  of the living.  
May God not make  this kind of deprivation  one's  own lot in 
life.
 7







Yet, that  is the level  of poverty  that  Adiitu-Olodumare's  
parents  lived  through  at a given  stage  of their  lives;  I will  now  
tell  you  the reason  for their  crippling  poverty.
They  lived  in a town  called  Ilakose.  You may  marvel at 
such  a name  for a town,  as it reminds  one of a small  animal  that 
resembles  the snail,  which  bears  the same  name.  Ilakose  carries  
a carapace  on its back  like that of the snail.  It crawls  about  like 
the snail  but Ilakose  may  live up to a thousand  years  on earth,  
yet it can never  be as big as the snail.  How  much  flesh  does  the 
snail  itself have?  If one makes  a stew with a snail,  no matter  
how  gingerly  one dishes  the stew,  it cannot  last for more than  
two  days  at most.  There  is no single  animal  in Ilakose  town  that 
is bigger  than Ilakose.  Nobody  ever saw a grass-cutter  in 
Ilakose.  No one ever  came  across  Ekiri,  the footprints  of Akata  
and those  of the antelope  were  never  found  in Ilakose,  neither  
were  those  of the bush-pig. Goats  had abandoned  Ilakose.  The 
same  thing  with  sheep. Dogs  rejected  the town. Ducks  also. It 
was as if God himself  had decreed  that the people  of Ilakose  
must  live  in total  suffering.
The town  we are talking  about  was a very small  one. 
The houses  in the town  could  not  be up to fifty.  The next  town  
to it was  the distance  of a whole  day's trek.  The  people  were  all 
farmers.  No lucrative  trade was possible  in the town since  
what Ojo planted  was what Ilori also planted.  Everybody
subsisted  on one's  own  crops.
Yet, as much  as I express  the poverty  of the people  of 
this town  and  that  of Obiri-Aiye,  who  was  the father  of Adiitu-  
Olodumare,  there  was  a time  in his life when  things  were  much  
better  with him, especially  in the year he married  his wife,  
Iponjudiran.  Obiri-Aiye  had an extensive  farm. He planted
8




yams,  maize,  walnuts,  beans  and all kinds  of spices  - green  
pepper,  the bigger  variety  of pepper  and so on. He had a good  
harvest  in that  year.  The yams  were  huge,  the maize  fruited  in 
manifold,  banana  bore numerous  rotund  children,  and beans  
yielded  countless  fingers.  The vegetables  were fresh and 
luxuriant.  All plants  wore  a deep  green  colour.  He made  up to 
twenty  pounds  from  his crops  that  year.  He made  fifty  pounds  
in the second  year  and a hundred  pounds  each  in the third  and 
fourth  years  of harvesting.  He now  reckoned  that  there  would  
not be a single  year,  however  lean, that he would  not make  a 
minimum  of fifty  pounds.  On this account,  he began  to spend  
prodigally.  What  was worse  about  it all was that he began  to 
live  above  his means.
A man  who  made  fifty  pounds  in a year  became  a friend  
of those who earned  fifty pounds  a month.  Some of those  
whose  company  he kept could  even make  fifty pounds  in a 
single  day. He stored  the kind  of wine  that  those  people  drink.  
He wore  their  kind  of clothes.  As deprived  of animal  as Ilakose  
was  - since  Ilakose  was their  biggest  animal  - this man  would  
send  for meat  from  places  that  were  three  days’ journey  away.  
The height  of all his excesses,  which  led to his renewed  
poverty,  was that he became  a casanova.  The women  he was 
moving  with were women  with sugar-coated  tongues  and 
treacherous  minds.  Women  who  the devil  had endowed  their  
hearts  with a ladder  of deceit;  if the devil took a step; they  
would  take  two  steps;  if it took  two,  they  would  climb  the third.  
They  would  continue  to climb  the ladder  until  they got to its 
peak. In the end, they would  become  incapable  of telling  a 
single  truth because  they have been enveloped  by lies and 
deceit.  Read this letter,  written  to Obiri-Aiye  by one of his 
lovers:
9






Ekefehintin  Street,  
Ilakose  town,  
July  18,1958.
My dearest  lover,
I can no longer  understand  this affair  of ours.  I am completely  
at a loss. Truly,  we women  are used  to the way in which  you  
men go about  making  love portions  from  herbalists  to entice  
women's  love.  However,  your  own  herbalist  is totally  unique.  
Can you imagine  that since yesterday  evening  I have not 
tasted  any food and I am writing  this letter  to you at four  
o'clock  in the afternoon?  I am full of thoughts  of  you as I feel  
like seeing  you all the time.  And  if you do not want  to kill me, 
my dearest  Obiri,  let me see  you immediately.  You must  come  
today  as I shall  be expecting  you before  the clock  strikes  seven  
this very night.  If you close  from  the farm  at five-thirty,  you
should be  able  to get here before  seven. 
How  is that  dog in your  house?  (That  fat-headed,  
flat-footed  one you call your  wife?) Do not call at her place  before  
you come  to me. As soon  as you leave  the  farm,  head  straight
for  my house. 
There is one matter  that I even want to discuss  with
you, my sweetheart,  and my unique  lover.  There  is this small  
amount  of  money  that  threatens  to disgrace  me. You know,  my 
friends  who are privy  to this love affair  between  you and I 
have  been  teasing  me with  the notion  that  I have  somebody  to 
depend  on. The money  in question  is not much  at all; it is only 
fifty pounds.  It is better  you bring it along  when you are
10





coming.  Let  it be like the one  you  gave  me the last time;  make  it 
in currency  notes  and  put  it in an envelope.
Please  come  in good  time  as I have  prepared  a meal  for 
you. You trust  me. It is not that I am bragging.  I dare not 
prepare  the miserable  stew that the fat head in your  house  
always  cooks.  Onions  with green leaves  and fresh strands,  
fresh  tomatoes  and tinned  ones,  spicy  peppers  of  all varieties,  
crayfish  and  little  eggs;  all of  them  have  held  a conference  with  
groundnut  oil on assorted  meat:  hunch,  liver,  tongue  and the 
choice  parts  of  duck.  The  stew  is made  in deep-fry.
So, I am anxiously  waiting  for  you,  my beloved.
I am yours,  body  and  soul,
I am yours,armsandlegs,
I am yours,headandneck,
I am yours for-e-e-ver. ... .And  ever,
Agbelebu-enia  (The  human  cross)

I want  you  to pay  close  attention  to this  letter.  What  she 
called  'fifty'  is not fifty kobo,  not fifty half-pennies;  it is fifty 
pounds.  Obiri could  not afford  to part with more than ten 
shillings  as gift at that point in his life. Tell me, how can 
anybody  give ten shillings  to someone  who  is asking  for fifty 
pounds  without  feeling  ashamed?  This  was the way  in which  
wayward  women  extorted money  from  this man,  Obiri-Aiye.  
At times, when  they  asked  him for money  and he said  he had 
none, they literally  searched  his pocket;  they searched  his 
trousers'  pockets,  they searched  the pockets  of his shirts  
because  they did not love him genuinely;  it was his money  
they  were  after.
11






This  letter  was  not an isolated  case.  It just  happened  that 
it dropped  out of Obiri-Aye's  hands.  Only God knows  how  
much  money  this  man  had  spent  wastefully  on this secret  lover  
of his. He dared  not let this information  of his spending  spree  
out to anybody.  If he gave  a woman  one pound,  he would  tell 
people  that it was the woman  who spent  two pounds  on him.  
He was usually  ashamed  of revealing  the story  of his prodigal  
spending  on women.  A gentleman  does not utter  words  like 
'This  is my money;  I can spend  it the way I want.  This is my 
body,  I can use it anyhow.'  What  matters  is how  he spends  the 
money  and  uses  his body.
As we said, farm  produce  no longer  yielded  profit  for 
Obiri-Aiye  as it used to. When  this was compounded  by the 
high society  company  that he was keeping  as well as the 
numerous  women  he was dating,  debts  piled  up for him.  One 
day, his creditors  locked  up his house,  seized  all his boxes  of 
clothes,  took  possession  of all his farms  and left him  with  only  
one  room  to live in. By the time  they  locked  up his  house,  Obiri-  
Aiye  had only one wrapper  to cover  his manhood.  His wife,  
Iponjudiran,  also  tied  a wrapper  around  her  waist.
Just as the creditors  who  locked  the house  left and the 
two of them sat dejectedly,  peering  into each  other's  eyes,  and 
their, son, Adiitu-Olodumare  who had just finished  his 
primary  education  was crying in the backyard,  another  
woman  entered  the house  and  insisted  that  she must  collect  her 
money  from Iponjudiran  before  leaving.  As at that time,  
Iponjudiran  had  only  three  pence  left  on her  and  Obiri-Aye had  
only one shilling  tied to his under-pant.  When  this woman  
found  that  husband  and  wife  were  completely  without  money  
and that those  they  owed  huge  sums  have  locked  the doors  to
12






their house  and took the keys away,  she forcibly  seized  the 
clothing  of the husband  and removed  the shawls  which  the 
wife  tied  around  her  waist.
It was a sad day in the house  of this couple.  The wife  
was a pool of tears.  The husband  entered  into the only room  
left for them,  put his hand to wedge  his chin and began  to 
groan  bitterly.  Promptly,  the wife let her tongue  loose  in this 
moment  of agony,  as a woman  was wont.  'Had  I known  that  I 
was coming  to face crisis,  would  I have  married  you? Dare  I 
marry  a luckless  fool! And  you  were  so persistent  in courtship.  
I tried  to shake  you off in vain.  An irresponsible  person.  The 
dangerous,  evil  person  that  you  are! '
'We told  you  but  did  you  listen?  We warned  you  against  
bad company,  you were  headstrong. We warned  you to desist  
from sneaking  into affairs  with other  people's  women,  you 
turned  deaf ears. You this foolish,  senseless,  thoughtless,  
hopeless  monkey.  Where  are you  headed  now?'
This  was how  Iponjudiran  began  to rain abuses  on her 
husband.  But what options  were available  to this man for 
rebuilding  his future?  He had only  one shilling  while  his wife  
had three  pence  and they  had a child  to raise,  a fourteen-year-  
old child.  The mother  had only  an underskirt  as clothing  and 
the husband  had an underpant.  Their  town,  Ilakose,  was far 
away  from other towns;  the nearest  town was the walking  
distance  of one whole  day. What  to do? Obiri-Aiye  tried to 
appease  his wife,  took  her three  pence,  and added  it to his own  
one  shilling.  He then  called  his son,  Adiitu-Olodumare:
’ My son,  Adiitu-Olodumare,  just  as your  name  denotes,  
the work of God is inscrutable;  if it pleases  God
13






Almighty he will decree  an end to the lives of your  
mother  and I. If he likes,  on the other  hand,  he will  map  
out new  ways  for us; he may  even  say that we had had 
enough  of good  times.  God sends  down  the rain  when  
he wishes,  and he makes  the sun to shine when  he 
wishes.  Rain  may  be falling on  one street  while  the sun 
shines  on the other  street.  All that  we can do as humans  
is to try out our  best,  struggle  hard  and  wait  on God  our 
maker  to bless  the work  of our hands;  the labour  of the 
world  is in two parts;  one for man,  the other  is for God.
If a person boils  water  and pours  ground corn into it 
and anticipates  corn-meal,  it still depends  on God to 
make  it so. Therefore,  my son, Adiitu,  prepare  now to 
travel  to the nearest  town  to ours.  Take  this money  and 
spend  it as you think  fit and in a way that hunger  will 
not  kill  me and  your  mother.  Farewell,  my son,  farewell.  
Please  return  tomorrow.  Farewell,  farewell,  farewell.
That was how the father  sent off his son. But do not 
forget  that all these took place at about ten-thirty in the 
morning  and that the son had not eaten anything  since  
morning  and there  was no likelihood  that he would  get any 
food  to buy in good  time on his way. Even  if he found  some
food,  where  was  the money  to buy  it?
The boy set off on his journey.  He was walking  and 
running  and  running  and  walking  at intervals.  By eight  o'clock,  
in the night,  he had moved  out of Ilakose’s vicinity  but he had 
barely  gone  half-way  through  his journey.  What  strange  things  
did he not encounter  when  night  fell? At times  he would  hear  
the roaring  of the lion,  at another  time  he would  hear  the shout
14





of the leopard.  The tiger crossed  his path  three times.  Snakes  
crawled  from behind  and in front of him. All the fantastic  
stories  that he had been told: stories  of spirits  and ghosts,  
stories  of people  who  had died  but resurfaced  in other  lands,
all these  kept  roaming  in his thoughts.  Hunger  descended  and 
the moon  shone  like the bright  afternoon  sun. He trudged  
along  alone  and lonely,  in the company  of God Almighty.  By 
midnight,  he became  tired.  The  boy sat down  in the middle  of 
the forest,  waiting  on the Lord.  But, as it were, sleep defied  
death.  As soon  as he sat down,  sleep  took  him  away.
When  Adiitu-Olodumare  woke  up the next  morning,  it 
was well after  seven-thirty.  He was totally surprised  to find a 
man  standing  on the side where  he laid his head  as if he was 
watching  over  him. The man  looked  comfortably  well-off.  He 
was wearing  a garment  of aran,  a pair of aran  trousers  and a 
cap made  out of aran cloth.  He wore  a large  gold ring on his  
fourth  left finger  after  the thumb.  Adiitu-Olodumare  observed  
the man closely  and saw that there  was a swelling  as big as a 
kernel nut standing  on the right  side of his skull  and another  
stuck  to his left ear. Then,  the man  had scraped  all the hair on 
his forehead.  Although  he was  wearing  a beard,  he had shaved  
his moustache  clean.  The man  held a walking  stick and wore  
sandals  made  out  of the skin  of python.
As the man stared  at Adiitu-Olodumare  and he too 
stared  back at him and their eyes met, the man burst into 
laughter.  Young  man,  where  are you  coming  from  that  you  had 
to sleep in  the middle  of this evil forest?  You  just slept  casually  
without  fearing  the wild animals  and without  sparing  any 
thought for  thieves.  You did not fear the ghosts  in the belly  of 
the Iroko trees or the dead ones who have not found  the
15






passage  unto  heaven  and are thus  roaming  in the open  and in 
hideous  corners?'
After  he had raised  these  questions,  Adiitu-Olodumare  
then  explained  his situation  to him  thus.
I come  from  a town  called  Ilakose  and  I am on my way  to 
a town  called  Ifehinti  which  is the nearest town  to our 
town. I am going  to buy the last meal  for my father  and 
mother.  All the money  left in our household  is one 
shilling  and three  pence  and that  was what  my parents  
gave  me to go and  buy food  for them  to eat. As you are 
seeing  me, there  is only  an underpant  on my father  and 
an underskirt  on my mother's  waist.  It has been  three  
days  now since  I last ate and that is why  I was so tired  
that I had to sleep  here,  but if the land  belongs  to you I 
seek  your  pardon  to please  allow  me to go away  quietly.
I shall  go and think  about  what  I will spend  this money  
to buy  that  will  be of help.  I am going  in search  of a kind  
person  who  will  come  to the aid of our  household.  What  
I have  just told  you is not meant  to deride  my parents.  I 
said it because  one does  not know  where  a helper  will 
emerge  from  because  anyone  who hides  his problems  
will go about  with  the problem  without  a solution,  but 
those  who  cry out loud  may  find a helper  who  will  bail 
them  out  of their  problems.
The  words  arrested  the attention  of the man  and  he took  
Adiitu-Olodumare  on the road  to one farmstead.  They got to 
the farm  after  a while.  They  did not find anybody  on the farm  
but the man picked  three  wraps  of cornmeal and put some  
stew  in a plate  and asked  him to eat. The boy was filled  after
16






eating  a wrap.  He then  asked  his helper  if he would  permit  him 
to take the rest of the wrapped corn meal  home  to his parents.  
The man answered  him saying,  'Take  all of them  away,  and I 
add these  for you' (he added  four more  wraps).  He went  into  
the room  and  brought  a male  garment  and a male  wrapper  and 
asked  the boy to give them  to his parents;  the father  should  
wear  the garment  while  the mother  should  tie the wrapper.  
After  this, he took  Adiitu-Olodumare  to a big plantain  farm  
and  told  him  to come  to the farm  every  Monday  to cut plantain  
for his parents.  He instructed  the boy not to cut more  than a 
stem  of plantain  on every  visit and that he must  never  come  
there  other  than  every  Monday  of the week.
The  episode  was like a dream  to Adiitu-Olodumare.  He 
stood  agape.  When  he found  his tongue  again,  he uttered  these  
words,  'Father,  I don't  know  you and I have never  met you 
anywhere  in this world  before,  but you saw me and you did 
not look  at me as a small  child,  you  did not punish  me, you  did 
not humiliate  me, you did not undermine  my person.  In like 
manner,  I pray that God will locate you in the dignified  
position  of an elder. All the things that you need for a 
comfortable  life at your old age: money,  children,  house,  
garments,  property  and all that  an elder  would  need  to have  to 
be a well-placed  elder  will  be yours  in abundance.  As you  have  
cared  for me, your  own  maker will care for you. As you have  
endowed  me, God  will also endow  you.  Just  as you found  me, 
knowing  neither  my father  nor my mother  and  you  had  mercy  
on me, in the same way, the ever-powerful  God will show  
mercy  on to you. I am deeply  grateful  to you but I must  
continue  my journey  to Ifehinti  town  where  I was sent, now  
that I am greatly  relieved.  When I buy things  from that town
17






then  I will return  home  to my parents  at Ilakose  town  to give 
report  on the good  things  that  you have  done  for us. Farewell
Baba,  Farewell,  farewell.  Baba.'
That was how the boy departed  and went to Ifehinti  
town  where  he was  sent  to. When  God  wants  to do any  favour,  
it pours  like rain.  It was a thing  of joy that  before  he got to his 
destination,  twice  he found  two  big snails  each  time  he wanted  
to ease  himself.  By then,  he had  left the outskirts  of Ilakose  but 
he knew  that  those  snails  would  fetch  a lot of money  in Ilakose  
town. So, he kept the snails  very carefully.  On arriving  at 
Ifehinti,  he bought  four  pence  worth  of salt and a cob of maize  
for two pence,  two pence  worth  of matches,  oil for one-and-a-  
half pence and pepper  for one-and-a-half  pence.  He then  
headed  back  to Ilakose.
Just  as this  boy  was  about  to enter  his home  on arrival  in 
Ilakose,  he heard  his father  crying  very  loudly, 'E-e-e-  help  me. 
E-e-e-  please  come  and help  me! All you people  of the world,  
save  me, all people  of heaven,  help  me.  Help  me all you  earthly  
goblins,  save  me all you  people  of magical  powers.  Sango,  save  
me, Obatala,  please  save me, Moslem  Alfas  please  come  and 
save  me, Jesus  Christ,  save  me. God,  my life is in your  hands,  
the living  God,  my fate  lies with  you,  the invisible  God,  my life 
is in your hands,  all citizens  of Ilakose,  farmers  of Ilakose,  
traders  of Ilakose , everybody  in Ilakose,  please  come  to my aid 
please,  please,  please.'
A major illness had attacked  Obiri-Aiye's  wife,  
Iponjudiran,  right from the day Adiitu-Olodumare  left the 
town.  In fact,  it started  just  about  an hour  after  he left. A heavy  
sweat  descended  on the woman  and she was drenched  as if 
beaten  by rain.  Her  eyes  were  red like dusk  sun. Her feet were
18




cold as snow  and her body  was hot like the red bottom  of a 
cooking  pot on fire. Her lips were swollen,  her back bent-  
double,  her neck  was stone-stiff,  her hands  shrank.  Going  to 
toilet  became  an ordeal,  sitting  down  was  trouble,  standing  up 
was a burden,  talking  was a problem,  walking  was  impossible,  
bending  down  was difficult. The skin  changed  from  black  and 
became  white like the sky. Her buttocks  became  flat, the 
stomach  protruded  out, the chest  became  bony,  the hair on the 
head  fell into pieces,  and the hair  in the armpit  fell off. It was a 
terrible  sickness.
All the herbalists  had fully assembled  when  Adiitu  
came in and the totem  they wanted  to use to prepare  their  
healing  portion  with  wascorn meal.  When  the boy  entered  and 
asked  for what  they  needed  to prepare  their  medicine  so that 
his mother  could  get well again,  they all spoke  in one voice  
saying,  'com  meal'.
The boy off-loaded  his bag and brought  thecorn meal  
out. It was immediately  mixed  with  concocted  herbs  and the 
herbalists  displayed  their magical  powers,  appeased  the 
witches,  calmed  the wizards  and  gave  the mystical  beings  their  
mystical  rites.  They  gave  the effigy  its own  needs  also.  Not  long  
after  all these, Iponjudiran  sat up and  started  talking  and once  
again  resumed  her  normal  life chores.
It was after everybody  had completely  got over  
Iponjudiran's  illness  that  Adiitu  -Olodumare  was  able  to report  
what  he came  back  with  from  his journey.  That  was the second  
day  after  his return  to Ilakose.
The boy gave an accurate  and detailed  report,  not 
mixing  one with two nor two with three. It was a complete  
surprise  for his father, especially  when he delivered  the
19




garment  to him and gave the wrapper  to Iponjudiran.  
Moreover,  he reported  that  he was  to return  to the farm  shown
to him  every  Monday  to cut plantain.
Obiri-Aiye  then retorted,  'You did not meet a human  
being.  It was my dead father  who came  to reveal  himself  to 
you. "Ah, what a pity, the dead one from heaven,  Ibanuje-fehinti,
 Ibanuje-fehinti,  Ibanuje-fehinti,  my father,  my father,  
huu,  huu,  huu,  huu,"  Obiri-Aiye  wept,  and everybody  started
to appease  him.
What  made  him  cry was that,  truly,  his dead  father  had 
such  a farm  as Adiitu  described,  but  Aditu  was  not old enough  
to know  Ibanuje-fehinti  because  he was in the womb  when  he 
departed  from  this  world.
20





Three
Adiitu-Olodumare  Meets Trouble  Spirit

Adiitu-Olodumare  went to cut Plantain  every  Monday.  He 
sold the two snails  he found  on the road to Ifehinti  town  for 
one pound.  One snail  fetched  him ten shillings.  This was the 
money  Obiri-Aiye  and Iponjudiran  spent on buying  food.  
When  their son returned  from  his Plantain-cutting  trips,  they  
got an additional  source  of eating and drinking.  Adiitu-  
Olodumare  turned  fifteen  on a certain  Sunday.  On the night  of 
 his birthday,  he had a terrible  dream.  It went like this: He 
found  himself  walking  in a big forest  full of different  kinds  of 
trees.  Iroko  (African  Teak)  and oganwo  (African  Mahogany)  
araba  and amo (mansonia),  po-npola  and ajekobale  (croton),  
akoko(Newbodia  laevia)  and peregun  (Draceena  specie)  and 
so on. As all these  numerous  trees and epithets  in this forest  
remained  without  a single  animal  in it, not even  a bush-rat  or a 
mouse,  squirrel  or lizard,  fly or ant was found;  so also there  
were no fishes in the river, not a toad nor a frog by the 
riverside.  There  was not a single  crab anywhere.  The whole  
environment  was  still  as if a great  bereavement  had  befallen  all 
the trees  and  the epithets.
Adiitu  went  on without  coming  across  a single  person  
and without  hearing  the voice of a living creature  until  
suddenly  he heard  a loud  outcry  that  seized  the forest  and the
21





grove.  It reverberated  across  the whole  forest.  The cry went  
like  this:  Tr-;-:ou-:ble!  Tr-:-:  ou-:ble!
: Trouble  Spirit  is coming  on the way  oh:-:  iroko  in the
forest,  take  cover,  oganwo  of the forest,  take  cover!  —. —. —. - •.
oh! Trouble oh!
This  was how  the voice  was roaring  and moving in the 
direction  of Adiitu.  When  it came  very  close  to him,  he quickly  
ran and climbed  a tree. Not  long after  he climbed  up the tree,  
this frightful  creature  emerged  with a ferocious  appearance.  
His body  was covered  with scales  like a turtle  and yet hairs  
that  were  as sharp  as needles  emerged  from  behind  the scales.  
The hair on his head  was plenty  and plaited,  and it stretched  
like a rope  behind  him  up to his waist.  His eyes  were  the eyes  of 
epiya  fish  but each  eye was six times  as big as the eye of epiya  
put together.  The nails  on his hands  and feet  were  over  six feet 
long  and  the nails  were  curved  like drumsticks and  sharp  as a 
knife,  like the  nails  of a hawk.  His mouth  resembled  that of a 
monkey  but his teeth  were like those of a lion. He covered  
himself  with palm-fronds  shaped  like a woman's  underskirt  
and  it spread  to his knees.  He hung  two  bags  each  on his right  
and left shoulders.  The  left-hand  bag was completely  made  of 
currency  notes  while  a part of the right-hand  bag was sown  
with  gold and the other  side was totally  covered  with  myrrh.  
On  his two  ankles  were  bangles  made  of brass,  coins  and pennies  
were tied on one bangle  while  half-pennies  were tied to the 
other  bangle.  All these  formed  a chorus  of jingles  as he walked
along.  Women of various  shapes,  forms  and features  trooped
after  this spirit.  One  was  black  and tall; she was of a moderate
build, neither fat nor thin. Another  one was light-complexioned,
22



 also tall and moderate.  Another-one  was also 
black, short as an impish  spirit, neither  thin nor fat, then  
another  one was fat and as short  as a manikin;  she was  neither  
fat nor thin.  One  was very  tall but not fat at all but black;  then  
one was very  short,  light  and slim. Another one  was very  tall 
and fat with  a very  broad  chest  and fat buttocks  and she was 
also  black.  Similarly,  one was  light-complexioned  and  very  fat. 
There  was  one that  was  light,  not very  fat but  was  as short  as an 
imp, she looked  like a bush  rat who  was rolling  a load on the 
road.  There  was one also that  was  black,  short  and stocky.  One 
was very tall, light and slim, and yet another  one was very  
short,  slim  and  black.
These  women  were  ranged  in two categories  according  
to their beauty;  one group comprised  women  that were  
extremely  beautiful.  If they  were  black,  they  were pleasing  to 
the eye,  if light,  they  glow;  if slim,  it would  make  being  slim  the 
best shape  to possess;  if they were  fat, it was as if everybody  
should  be fat; those that were fat enticed  people  with their  
fatness;  the short  ones  were  also good  to behold.  There  were,  
on the other hand, numerous,  prohibitively  ugly women  
among them.  Some  of their  noses  were  like caves,  lips flabby,  
mouths  thin while  their  lips were  as thick  and as large  bowls  
made  from  copper.
These  were  the features  of all those  who accompanied  
the Trouble  Spirit,  and when  he got to the spot  where  Adiitu-  
Olodumare  was, he looked  up and saw him on the tree. He 
started  speaking,  'You  son of man,  come  down  here,  I desire  to 
kill and  eat you.  I am Trouble  Spirit,  commander  of the army  of 
the great  king of the world  and all that is in it, Esu Elegbara,  
king  of Hell.  I go round  the world  twenty-four  times  in a day
23






and my duty  is to put all of you in trouble.  Look  at me, I am 
battle-ready.  If we split  the chaos  and intrigues of you human  
beings  into a hundred  places, forty-five  of them  occur  because  
of money,  another  forty-five  will be on matters  pertaining  to 
women;  see how  numerous the women  under  my control  are. 
Money  and women  are the two things  that people  must  have  
but which  are difficult  to keep  in this world;  only  wise  people  
can manage  them  well. How  much  wisdom  do you humans  
have?  Instead  of you to seek  women  with  stealth  so that you 
can find women  of quality,  you rush  to pick women  without  
envisaging  the thorns  and the danger  therein  and so you  put 
your right foot inside  fiery thorns  and your left foot inside  
thorny  groves,  and  these  bring  harm  to you.  I hate  you  people,  I 
hate  you  people,  and  I hate  you people  very  deeply, especially  
when,  of all creatures,  it is you humans  that God loves  most.  
Come  down,  you man on the tree, with  your  pot-belly,  your  
bulky  back-neck,  your  fat buttocks,  all of them  will  rendezvous  
in my soup-pot,  I, Trouble  Spirit,  Trouble  Spirit,  Trouble  Spirit.
This was what  the spirit  said and before  he ended  his 
speech,  his retinue  shouted  in one voice,  'Great  king. Great
king.  Chief,  Man  of prosperity. ’
Adiitu  remained  still on the tree. The spirit  waited  but 
he sat, unmoved,  on the tree.  After  a while,  the spirit  upturned  
one of the bags  on his shoulders  and all kinds  of evil creatures  
trooped  out: cobra, python,  paramole  and monumonu.  
Millipede,  earthworm,  toad, frog, ant, scorpion,  and various  
other crawling  creatures  that we cannot  count  jumped  out. 
From  among  these  animals,  the python  emerged  and  began  to 
coil itself  around  the tree  on which  Adiitu  sat, climbing  the tree 
until  it made  contact  with  him.  As soon,  as it touched  him, it
24






began  to coil itself  round  him  like a rope.  As soon  as it untied  
itself,  Adiitu  began  to descend  until  he found  himself  in front  
of Trouble  Spirit  without  sustaining  any  bodily  harm.  As soon  
as he landed.  Trouble  Spirit  started  to retrieve  all the creatures  
back  into his bag and put it on Adiitu's  head  and asked  him  to 
move  ahead  to the place  where  he was going  to be killed  and 
consumed.  He inflicted  all kinds of punishment  on Adiitu.  
Apart  from  the load  which  he carried,  he cut some  whips  from  
the forest  to beat him at regular  intervals  with a marching  
chorus,  'Carry your  bondage  along,  son of man  or you do not 
wish  to go?'  Adiitu  then  answered,  'It is not  my  load.  Spirit.'
Trouble  Spirit  spoke  in this manner  and  Adiitu  went  in 
front, carrying  Trouble-Spirit's  bundle while the Spirit  
followed  him.  They  went  on like that  until  they  came  under  an 
Iroko  tree and  the Trouble  Spirit  began  to state  his case  before  
Iroko.
'Iroko,  it is you that humans  slash  to make  chairs,  it is 
you  they  slash  to make  beds,  it is you  they  slash  to make  boxes;  
it is with  you also that they  build  the coffins which  they  bury  
their dead ones. They make you go through  all kinds of 
indignity.  Look at this one, son of Man, who assembled  all 
kinds of evil areatures,  carrying  them about  to do wicked  
things.  That  load  is what  he is carrying  on his head.  Now  I ask 
you,  should  I slaughter  him  for food  or not?  Should  I kill a man  
who is carrying  a cobra  around  to do evil or should  I spare  
him? Should  I spare the life of the man who is carrying  
scorpion  and  green  snake  for harmful  purposes  or should  I kill 
him?'
Iroko did not bother  to listen  to Adiitu's  side of the 
matter  before  recommending  his death  to Trouble  Spirit.  The
25






Spirit  did  not  kill  Adiitu  instantly,  but  kept  dragging  him  along  
with  his load,  narrating  his tale to numerous  other  trees and 
none  of them  cared  to ask for the man's  side of the case. Only  
the Spirit's  story  was taken  before  condemning  him to death.  
When  they  got to the seventh  tree,  a poisonous  tree at that,  and 
he judged  the same  way  as the others,  Trouble-Spirit  drew  out ’ 
his knife.  As he cut into  Adiitu-Olodumare's  belly  in order to 
slaughter  him, he woke  up from  his dream.  So, it was only a 
dream,  after  all.
Next morning,  the day Adiitu  was to go and cut the 
Plantain,  he narrated  his dream  to his mother  who counseled  
him against  going.  But when  they  told Obiri-Aye  the story,  he 
asked  his son to act like a man  and go. In any case,  Adiitu  had 
already  made  up his mind  to go. He got ready  to go and  cut the 
plantain.
As he got there,  and as soon  as he raised his cutlass to 
cut the Plantain,  a voice  spoke  from  inside  the forest,  'Who  are 
you?' He answered,  'It is I, Adiitu-Olodumare.'  The voice  
interrogated  him further,  'What are you trying  to do?' He 
answered  again  saying,  'I want  to cut Plantain.'  The voice  now  
asked  him,  'Who  sent  you?'  and  he answered,  'It is my  father.'
'Who  is your  father?'
'Obiri-Aiye  is my father.'
'Is he the owner  of the plantain?'
'No,  he is not.'
'Why  are you  cutting  plantain  in somebody  else's  farm?'
'It was  a certain  man  who  gave  me permission  to do so. '
'Please  tell me the name  of the person  immediately.'
'I don't  know  the name  of the person  at all.'
This  was  how  the exchange  transpired  between  the two.
26






Adiitu  had hardly  finished  speaking  when  some  twenty-four  
people  came  out of the bush  and  seized  him  and  tied  his hands  
firmly  with  a rope  behind  him.  Then,  they  tied  many  plantains  
around  his neck and pushed  him forward.  All of them,  with  
whips  in their hands,  began  to sing and thrash  him as they  
moved  along.  Someone  would  raise  a song  and  lead  it like  this:
'See  the eyes  of the thief. '
The  others  will  respond, ' Womu. '
'See  the chest  of the thief .'
'Womu.'
'See  the arms  of the thief.'
'Womu.'
'See  the feet  of the thief  
' 'Womu.'
'See  the  belly  of the thief .' 
'Womu.'
And  so on.

After  covering  some  distance,  they stopped  suddenly  
and started  clapping,  and ordering Adiitu  to dance.  He was 
reluctant  to dance,  but  when  they  began  to beat  him,  he started  
dancing  with  tears  pouring  down  his cheeks  like a flood.  They
made  the boy go through  intense  suffering.  At times,  they  
asked  him  to swing  his buttocks.  At other  times,  he was asked  
to turn  in circles.
What was worse in all his travails  was that they  
compelled  him  to confess  to a crime  which  he did not commit.  
When  they brought  him before  the Secretary  to the King of 
Ifehinti,  he was ordered  to repeat  after  them  thus, 'I, Adiitu-  
Olodumare,  a luckless  man,  I started off early  in my life with
 27







the business  of stealing.  I became  a burglar.  I donned  the hat of 
a common  rogue.  I made  stealing  my sole business.  I stole  
withoutbeing  caught  hut everyday  is for the thief  and one day 
is for the owner.  At long last, they caught  me in somebody's  
farm  where  I was stealing  someone's  plantain,  yet I  know  that 
certainly;  they must convict  me for stealing  and award  the 
penalty  for stealing  in accordance  with  the laws  of the town  of 
Ifehinti.'  All these  statements  he had  to make  under  the duress  
of whipping.  It was a great surprise  that that was the basis  
upon  which  the police  of Ifehinti  prosecuted  Adiitu  when  his 
case  was  heard.
The  laws  of Ifehinti  were  very  harsh  on theft.  Death  was 
the penalty  for anybody  convicted  for stealing.  The 
constitution  of Ifehinti,  chapter  Twenty-four,  verse  seven  read  
thus:
Death  is the punishment  for a thief. No thief, no matter  how 
small the item he has stolen,  can escape  this punishment.  
Anyone  who steals  a piece  of  meat  from  his mother's  cooking-  
pot is a thief;  any woman  who  goes  from  her husband's  house  
to take a loaf of corn meal without  permission  is a thief;  
anyone  who takes  gari (grains  of  cassava)  without  permission  
is a thief;  he is a thief  who  digs up yams  from  his  father's  farm  
without  permission;  the man  is a thief  who wears  his  father's 
clothes  without  authorization;  she is also a thieving  woman  
who ties her  mother's  wrapper  without  taking  permission.

Ifehind's  constitution,  chapter  seven,  verse  twenty-four  
also  stated  that:
28


Every five  years,  a chief  from  among  the medicine-men  of the 
town  shall  be elected  as the Judge  of the Thieves  (Adajo  Ole).
He will be in charge  of the killing  of all thieves.  Nobody  shall  
die by hanging,  instead,  the thief  shall be tied with ropes  and 
his head  shall  be severed  from  his neck  at a single  blow  of the 
cutlass.
The last paragraph  of that page of the constitution  
however  read  thus:
Before  Adajo  Ole  pronounced  a sentence  on a suspect,  he must  
give room for thorough  investigation.  Any judge that 
pronounces  a false  sentence  of  theft  on anybody  shall  be killed.
The  law  on stealing  had  been  in the town  of Ifehinti  for a 
very long time, even before  the ascendancy  of His Royal  
Highness,  Ofintoto  the First and it was Ofintoto  the Twelfth  
that was on the throne  during  Adiitu's  trial.  After  Adiitu  had  
been  forced  to append  his name  to the statement that he was 
compelled  to make,  he was handed  over  to the warders  of the 
prison  to take  custody  of him  until  his case  would  be judged.
Adiitu's  father  got no news  of his child  but when  it was 
two days  after  he was  billed  to return  and  he did not come,  he 
set off on the  journey  to search  for his son.
Adiitu's  father  arrived  in Ifehinti  town  the very  day  that 
Adiitu  was to be killed.  It was just one minute  before his son 
was to be beheaded  when  he appeared  before  them in the 
centre  of the market  place.  All the procedures  were  followed  
according  to the tradition  of the town  of Ifehinti  regarding  the 
killing  of a thief  would  be revealed  to you  presently.
On that day, at about eight-thirty,  everybody  had 
assembled  at the centre  of the market.  Adajo  Ole emerged  in







his regalia  as Chief  Judge  of Thieves.  It was a garment  sown  
with  white  Calico.  It was bedecked  from  top to bottom  with  
coins.  They  then sewed  various  magical  spells  and totems  on 
the garment,  after  which  they  tied  unto  the garment  feathers  of 
birds,  heads  of birds  and bones  of snakes.  This was done  to 
ensure  that  there  were  no holes  at all on the garment.
Where there were coins, there would be magical  
portions;  where  there  were  no portions,  there  would  be totems;  
and where  there  were  no totems,  there  would  be feathers  and
heads  of birds  on the garment.
The king arrived  on his throne  at exactly  nine o'clock.  
He wore  a crown  and  beaded  sandals  and  he hung  two  human  
skulls  around  his neck; the face of one skull faced  the front  
while  the other  faced the  back,  meaning  that his back  did not 
recline  on the chair.
Adajo Ole pulled  Adiitu  by the hand to the King ’s 
presence  and began  to speak.  'Kabiyesi,  Your  Royal  Highness,  
next  to God  in Dominion,  Iku BabaYeye,  Oba Ofintoto  who  is 
greater  than  all other  kings.  We arrested  this thief  from  a farm  
stealing  plantain.'
Ofintoto  replied  thus, 'Have you thoroughly  
investigated  the matter  and  you  are sure  that  he committed  the 
offence?'
Adajo  Ole said, 'I have  investigated,  other  people  have  
also investigated.  We caught  him where  he was cutting  the 
plantain  and the owner  of the farm said that he did not give 
him  permission,  but  he said  someone  gave  him  the authority  to 
do so and when  we asked  him to name  the person,  he was 
unable  to give the name, so we arrested  him as a thief,  
Kabiyesi.'
30






The king then commanded,  'Show  him round  to the 
whole  town and judge him according  to our custom  and 
tradition.'
It was after this that Adajo Ole commanded  his 
messengers  to act according  to the law. They  brought  out a 
heavy  log of wood,  removed  Adiitu's  clothes,  caused  him to 
kneel  down,  set his neck  on the tip of the log, fixed  a heavy  iron 
bar on his knee  to tighten  it securely  and then  set a heavy  ring 
at the back  of his neck  which  pushed  the head  forward,  leaving  
only  the neck  on the log.
Hunters  and herbalists  formed  a ring around  the boy. 
After this, Adajo  Ole carried  a palm frond and struck  the 
ground  with it once and then shouted  in a terrifying  voice  
saying,  'O you citizens  of Ifehinti!'  All the spectators  and the 
herbalists  answered,  'Ye-s-s-s-oh!'  He struck  the ground  for the 
second  time and shouted  as he did before  and the audience  
also  responded  as before.  He struck  the ground  with  the palm-  
frond  for the third  time  and  they  all responded  the third  time.
When  he shouted  the fourth  time  and they  all answered  
him, he spoke,  'Adiitu-Olodumare,  a native  of Ilakose  and a 
stranger  to this land,  stole  plantain  from  somebody's  farm  and 
we are ready to kill him, according  to the dictates  of our 
tradition.  Anybody  who  has any reason  why  we must  not kill 
him  should  say so now  or keep  his mouth  shut  forever. '
Everybody  maintained  stolid  silence,  and  Adajo  Ole hit 
the palm  frond  on the ground  agam  for the fifth time  saying,  
'Adiitu-Olodumare,  native  of Ilakose  and stranger  to this land  
cut plantain  illegally  from  another  person's  land and we are 
ready  to kill him according  to the dictates  of our tradition.  
Anybody  who  has any reason,  whatsoever,  why  we must  not 
kill  him  should  say so now  or keep  his mouth  shut  forever.'
31




As Adajo Ole shouted  his final announcement,  the 
executioner  raised  up his machete.  There  was only  one more  
public  announcement  to come, after  which  if nobody  spoke  of 
any reason  why he should  not be killed,  Adiitu  would  be 
beheaded.
Obiri-Aiye,  who had been  in frantic  search  for his lost 
son  since  he left Ilakose  town,  arrived  in the midst  of the crowd  
just before Adajo  Ole finished  his second  announcement.  He 
ended his third shout that, 'Adiitu-Olodumare,  native of 
Ilakose and stranger  in this town stole plantain  from  
someone's  farm  and  we wish  to kill him  in accordance  with  the 
laws of our land...'  When  he said that anyone  who has any 
reason  why  he should  not be killed  should  speak  up now or 
keep  quiet  forever,  Obiri-Aiye  ran out from  among  the crowd  
shouting  in a loud  voice  thus, ' I have  found  it oh!' and dashed  
forward in front  of Adajo Ole. As was customary,  they  had to 
find  out  what  reason  he had.
Everybody  was startled,  even the king stood  up. The 
executioner  lowered  the machete.  Obiri-Aiye  found  his son 
where  he was tied and he nearly burst  into tears  but he took  
manly  control  of his emotion.  He turned  to Adajo  Ole and said,  
'This is my son, he did not steal at all, he did not steal the 
plantain,  someone  he met on his way  to Ifehinti  town  where  I 
sent him on an errand  gave him the permission  to cut the 
plantain  from  the farm  where  you arrested  him. I and  my son 
believed,  without  doubt,  that the man was the owner  of the 
farm.'
Everyone  who heard  this statement  shouted  in loud  
unison,  'Name  the person.  Give  us the name  of the person:'
As Adiitu  was firmly  tied down,  he could  not open  his 
mouth  to speak.  Adajo  Ole then went  to take permission  to







untie  the boy so he could  speak  a little.  His thinking  was that 
the boy  would  speak  a little  before  they  killed  him  since  he had 
told them  before  what  his father  had  just said  but  his inability  
to provide  the name of the person  who authorized  him to cut 
the plantain  prevented  them  from  believing  him.
They  untied  Adiitu.  Adajo  Ole spoke,  'If it is true,  then  
give the name  of the person  to the hearing of all of us.' Adiitu  
replied,  'I don't  know  his name.'  Adajo  Ole then grimaced  at 
Obiri-Aiye  and  said,  'Case  closed?'
Obiri  said, 'It is not over at all, please  permit  me to ask 
him one more  question.'  Obiri  then  asked  his son, 'If you saw 
the man, would  you recognize  him?' Adiitu  said, 'I will 
recognize  him  clearly.'  Obiri  asked  his son again,  'Describe  any 
feature  that you can remember  about the  man who gave  you 
permission.'
Adiitu  began  to speak  thus, 'I recall  that the man was 
not an ordinary  citizen  at all as he wore a very expensive  
garment.  He had a certain  swelling  in his forehead  and the 
swelling  was as long as this (he exemplified  with one of his 
fingers).  He wore a beard  but he had no moustache;  it was 
clean-shaven.  There  was no single  hair on his eyebrow,  it was 
plainly  bare.  This  is all I can  remember  about  the man. '
Now,  there  was a problem.  There  was only one-person  
in the whole of Ifehinti  town  that had the kind  of swelling  in 
the forehead  that Adiitu  had described  and the person  is the 
Deputy  King  and  he was  not  present  at the trial  even  though  he 
had  got  wind  of the matter.
The  king  himself  began  to suspect  that  the boy  might  be 
speaking  the truth about the permission  he said he got 
especially  since  the farm  of his Deputy  was not too far away







from  the farm  under  description.  The king then ordered  the 
crowd  to disperse  and  that  Adiitu  be released  to his father  with  
a proviso  that he and his father  must  not leave  the town  until  
he gave  the order.
In the whole  world,  the Ifehinti  people  were the most  
gifted  in handiwork.  If they  moulded  a human  being,  you can 
only  discover  that  it is not a real  human  being  when  you speak  
to it and it is mute,  when  Adiitu  described  the person  who  
authorized  his cutting  of the plantain,  everybody  traced  it to 
the deputy  king. No one else in the town carried  such a
swelling  that  Adiitu  described.
But it is a grave  matter  to charge  the deputy  king of a 
town  with  theft.  The  king  selected  six wise  men  of the town  to 
deliberate  on the matter  and  advise  him  on what  he should  do.
After  their  investigation,  they advised  the king  to find 
out from  his deputy  if indeed  he was the one who  gave  Adiitu  
the permission  to cut the plantain  from  someone  else's farm.  
The king  then  sent for his deputy  to come  and see him.  When  
he came  and  the king  asked  him,  he flatly  denied.
Throughout this  period,  Adiitu  was not allowed  to set 
eyes  on this man  at all. In the town  of Ifehinti,  beard-growing  
was a man's  fashion,  but nobody  wore  beard  and shaved-his  
moustache.  This was the look the man  wore  when he misled  
the boy  but this episode  had taken  place since  six months  ago 
and since then, the man's beard, his eyebrows  and his 
moustache  had all grown  back as if they had never  been  
shaved.
The wise men of the town  then went and assembled  
seventeen  men of the same  height  and the same  weight  with  
the man.  They  then  moulded  swellings  on all their  heads  and







on the same  spots  as the one on the head  of the deputy  king.  
After  this, they  ordered  all the seventeen  men  and the deputy  
king  to shave  their  moustache  and their  eyebrows.  They then  
lined  these  men up, one after the other  and the deputy  king  
was  placed  in the third  position  from  the rear.  They  were  asked  
to match in front  of Adiitu-Olodumare.  The first man  walked  
passed,  Adiitu  did not pick  him,  the second  passed,  he did not 
pick  him, and so they  were  all walking  pass.  When it became  
the turn  of the deputy  king,  he quickly  picked  him, 'This  is the 
man.  This  is the man.  This  is the man,'Adiitu  shouted.
Immediately,  they  ordered  the police  to arrest  the king's  
deputy.  They  handed  him  over  to Adajo  Ole to sentence  him  to 
death.
The chieftaincy arrangement  in the town  did not carve
out special  designated  titles such as Balogun  or Otun  or Osi 
(War Commander,  the king's  Right-hand  man or Left-hand  
man  to the king).  There  were  no Lisa  or Sasere  or Ojomu  titles,  
no Basorun  or Agbakin,  neither  Seriki  nor  Agoro.  The  king  was 
the king, after him other chiefs  were listed  in order  of their  
importance  such  as deputy  king, the  third  person  of the town,  
the fourth  person  in town,  the fifth,  the sixth  and so on. These  
were  the designations  of their  titles.
One of the rules  in the constitution  of Ifehinti  town  in 
chapter  twenty-one  on page  ten read  thus:
A chief  that causes  another  man to steal shall die. The king  is 
empowered,  if he so wishes,  to convert  the death  sentence  to 
any  other  kind  of punishment  that  he pleases.
The second  rule on page eight of the constitution  also read  
thus:







No chief  is allowed  to die alone  in Ifehinti  town.  If a chief  dies a 
natural  death,  the Council  shall name  a person  that will die
with him. If a chief  commits  an offence  that carries  death  
penalty,  the chief  must name  the person  who must die with 
him and whosoever that he shall  name  must  die will him.  If a 
king dies, four persons  shall die with him and if a king is 
condemned  to death,  he shall himself  name  the four  persons  
that  will  die with  him.
These  types of rules will surprise  people  of this age. 
Students  may even consider  it as something  that cannot  be 
true, but rules surrounding  death  among  the Yoruba  can be 
likened  to these  rules.  When  a king  dies,  one of his slaves  and 
one of his wives  must die with him, only that they do not 
announce  the names of these  companies in public.  Even  then,  
the closest  slave  and the closest  wife  to the king  during  his life 
time usually  died with him. This tradition  is not unique  to 
Yorubaland.  Studies  reveal  that the Egyptian  Pharaohs  were  
accompanied  to their  graves  in the olden  days.
This  case  was,  however, not judged  on that day but the 
king ordered  that his deputy  be thrown  into prison  until  his 
case  was  tried.  He gave  them  nine  days  to determine  the case.
On the appointed  day, Adajo  Ole had concluded  all 
necessary  arrangements.  They  had lined  all the herbalists and  
hunters  around  the spot where  the king's  deputy  would  be 
killed  and they had prepared  the huge  log that he would  be 
tied to it and the executioner  was ready  with  his machete.  The
Adajo  Ole, who was already  fully  robed  in his regalia,  
came  before  the king  and  began  to speak,  'Kabiyesi,  this is the 
deputy  king of this town,  he is your deputy,  he was the one
 36







who  misled  Adiitu-Olodumare  to steal  plantain  from  another  
man's  farm  without  the permission  of the owner  of the farm.  
The law of our land from generations  past stipulates  that a 
chief  that  leads  anybody  to steal  must  die. If the king  does  not 
want him to die, he is empowered  to convert  the death  
sentence  to any other  kind of punishment  that he may  prefer  
for him.  So, Kabiyesi,  do you want  to commute  the penalty  or 
not?'  The  king  was  silent.  Adajo  Ole asked  the first,  second  and 
third  time and the king  was mum.  When  the king  maintained  
such  a silence,  it meant  that  he wanted  the death  sentence  to be 
carried  through  in accordance  with  the rule.  The king  wanted  
him  to die  because  there  was  no love  lost  between  them.
Adajo  Ole then  prepared  to tie the deputy  king  up, they  
had even  floored  him  before  they  remembered that  he had to 
name  the person  who  would  die with  him.  He faced  the deputy  
king  and  read  the law  to him  which  states  thus:
If a chief  commits  an offence  for which  he must  be sentenced  to 
death,  that chief  must  name the person  who will die with  him 
and anybody  that he so names  from the town must  die with  
him.
Adajo  Ole again  spoke  on, 'Now,  deputy  king,  you  have  
committed  a taboo,  you  forgot  your  place  in town  and  now  you 
have  fallen into  a deep  well;  you misled  another  person;  you 
gave  someone  else's  farm  to another  person.  The  medicine  men  
of the town  convict  you; the  gods  of the town  sentence  you to 
death.  Sango,  the thunder  god condemns  you to death.  The 
Oya goddess  sentences  you to death;  the masquerades  of the 
town  condemn  you  to death;  the cults  of the town  sentence  you 
to death;  the witches  and  the wizards  of the town  sentence  you 
to death.  All the powerful  people  of the underworld,  yoimg







and old, men and women,  and all the aged people  have  
sentenced  you  to death.  According  to our custom,  deputy  king,  
before  your  head  is severed  from  your  neck,  tell  us: who  do you 
want  to die with  you?'
This  was  the verdict  of Adajo  Ole and  everybody  waited  
for the last words  from the mouth  of the deputy  king. He 
started  to speak,  'Dear  fellow  citizens, I greet  you all; the aged  
ones,  the menfolk,  the youths,  men,  women,  the wizards  of the 
town,  the witches  of the town,  I greet  you all. (He faced  the 
king.)  Kabiyesi,  I pay  homage.  It has  been  ages,  great  one,  since  
you and I have been together.  We have dined and wined  
together,  we have  shared  wise  counsels  together;  we have  been  
like the mouth  and the tongue,  it is unheard  of that  the tongue  
will go somewhere  without  the mouth.  Kabiyesi,  it is you I 
choose  to die with  me.'
When he had spoken  like this, there was a great  
rumbling.  Some  said, 'It is a lie, the law does  not apply  to the 
king.'  Some  others  said, 'It is treachery,  nobody  had ever died  
and the king  had to die with  him. There  is nothing  like that  in 
the Constitution. ..' And so on and so forth.  But what  the law 
said was that, 'Anybody  he names  within  the town  must  die 
with  him.'  The  law  did  not  exclude  the king.
The king fell into a deep confusion.  He commanded  
Adajo  Ole to re-examine  the law and he frantically  searched,  
the books  thoroughly  but nowhere  in the laws was the king  
exempted.  The king  now  had to prepare  himself  for heaven.  
He was covered  with sweat from head to toe. From his 
buttocks  to his chest,  water  flowed  freely  from  the king's  body.
According  to tradition,  the king  must  die the same  day 
with  his deputy,  but he must  make  his valedictory  speech  to 
the gathering.  The  king  stood  up, when  he spoke,  he did so like
 38




a stammerer,  'I-I-I-I-I-  tha- tha-tha-tha-  nk you all my town's  
people.  When  something  comes,  it comes.  People  of lesser  
status  than  I have  died,  those  who  are greater  than  I have  also  
died.  My equals  have died, those  who are smaller  than  I am, 
have  also  died.  The creator  does  his thing  the way  he chooses.  I 
am ready  to go to the place  where  my own  father  had gone.  As 
I go, please  take  care  of my property;  take  care  of my children,  
take care of my wives,  take care of my farms  and my animal  
husbandry.  Share my legacies  very well; give my Agbada  
garments  to those who deserve  Agbada  garments,  give the 
buba  garments  to those they  befit;  give trousers  to those  whd  
deserve  trousers  and give my dandogo,  common  wears,  to 
ordinary  citizens.  Goodbye.  It is time to go. Bring  the log of 
wood,  tie my neck  to it and let the executioner  act sharply  and 
cut  my neck  once  and let the evil  head  tumble  away,  he--!  he --! 
he —I he—! he! the  king  burst  into  tears.  When  the king  finished  
speaking  and wiped his tears,  Adajo  Ole asked  him to name  
the four  persons  who  must  die with  him  and  the king  turned  to 
the third  in line  and  spoke  to him  thus:
My beloved  friend,  you are the shell  on my back,  I am 
the tortoise.  I have  never  left you  behind  whenever  I go 
to anywhere.  On the day of joy, we rejoiced  together,  
when  there was hunger,  we went  hungry  together.  We 
danced  together,  when  there  was a dance.  We shared  
laughter  on happy  days,  and  wept  together  on sad days.  
Now  that death has come,  it is compulsory  that death  
should  take us away  together.  Adajo  Ole, I choose  the 
third  chief  of the town  to go with  me to the life  beyond.
That  was what  the king  said  to the third  in line and the  
man's  eyes glowed  red like sun at dusk.  The king again  faced  
the fourth  chief of the town and spoke  thus, 'The fourth  in
39






town,  my dear fourth  in command,  very important  fourth  in 
line, very special  fourth  in line, a fourth that is greater  than  a 
fourth.  The rainy  season  is different  from  the dry season;  the 
cold times  are different  from the warm  times;  the season  of 
planting  is different  from  the time of harvesting;  the time for 
crying  is different  from the time of laughter;  resting  time  
differs  from  the time  of leisure;  none  of these  seasons  can  occur  
at the same time. We have gone through  all these seasons  
together;  we have  laughed  together  and we have  shared  bitter  
times  together.  You and I have  drank  water  together;  we have  
also shared  wine together.  We have drank  gourds  of palm-  
wine  together  in the palace.  My dear friend,  death  has come  
and we must  die together.  Adajo  Ole, I choose  the fourth  in
town  to accompany  me to heaven.'
The  king  turned  to the fifth  in command  in the town  and 
said,  'Fifth  in town,  my own  dear  fifth  in town.  You  special  tree.
araba  tree,  the one the world  underrated  and said  he could  not 
build  a town;  jegede  tree like a play,  like in a play,  like in a joke 
became  a big man indeed.  Some  people  on this earth  were  
created  from sand by the creator  and they lacked  strength.
there are some  that were  moulded  with  mud  and they  are not
strong.  But our fifth  in town,  you are not one of those  people.  
The creator  moulded  you with solid rock. I am taking  you 
along,  so that we keep  each  other company  to heaven  beyond.  
Adajo  Ole, I choose  the fifth in town to accompany  me to
heaven.'
When  he had spoken  thus, he faced  the sixth  in town  
and said, 'My sixth in town who is solely  mine. Since you 
became  the sixth  in town;  your  number  never  drew  trouble  in 
this town;  your  number  did not pull disease  to this town;  your  
number did not attract  turmoil  to this town;  your  number  has
40






always  attracted  progress  to the dogs,  of the town. It pulls  
progress  to the animals  of this town,  it draws  money  to homes,  
it draws  children.  As I found  goodness  in the world,  I want  to 
find  goodness  in heaven,  as a result,  I must  take you along  so 
that you can use your drawing  number  to draw goodness  
along  with  ine to heaven.  Adajo  Ole, I choose  the sixth  in town  
to accompany  me to heaven.'
This was how things  transpired  that six chiefs  would  
have  to die in the town  of Ifehinti.  Don't  forget,  of course,  that 
all these  chiefs  who  had  to die must  not die alone.  Each  of them  
must  choose  the person  who  will  die with  him  before  he died.
Everybody,  from  Adajo  Ole to all the spectators,  was 
perplexed  by the stalemate  of the moment.  Among  the 
condemned  chiefs  are relations  of the executioner  from the 
mother  and father's  lineage,  even  Adajo  Ole was at his wit's  
end. Everybody  was silent, tongue-tied.  All eyes were  
sorrowful,  more  sour than a seventeen-day  old soup.  After  a 
while,  Adajo  Ole turned  to the king  and said: 'Kabiyesi,  I have  
thought  very deeply,  I have thought  profoundly,  I have  
thought  very  seriously  over  this matter.  I have  been  around  in 
this world  for quite  a while.  Since  I became  Adajo  Ole, I have  
judged  numerous  cases  of thieves.  Kabiyesi,  the matter  at hand  
cannot be  rushed;  it is a matter  that  requires  deep  thinking.  The 
permission  I want  to seek  is that  we allow  the youths  of Ifehinti  
to go and ponder  over  this matter  for nine days.  My advice  is 
not to seek reprieve  for those condemned  to death. My 
suggestion  is that all you chiefs  should  return  here with the 
garments  you intend  to wear  to heaven  on the appointed  day. 
Before  that  day,  you  would  disburse  all your  belongings  as you 
please.  You  would  have  to arrange  your  farms  and  your  homes,  
make  arrangements  for your  children,  your  wives,  your  friends
41






and your  well-wishers.  You  will come  here  with  the certitude  
that  it would  be your  last day  on earth.  That  is my suggestion,  
Kabiyesi.'
The king  perfectly  understood  the words  of Adajo Ole  
and  the chiefs  were  slightly  pleased  that  they  had  some  time  to 
put their homes  in order. The king accepted  Adajo  Ole's  
proposition  and he gave  the youths  of the town  nine days  to 
deliberate  on their  deaths.
Within  those  nine  days,  the people  condemned  to death  
were  deeply  worried.  They  could  not  eat, they  could  not drink.  
They  were  consumed  by sorrow,  they  became  lean,  their  broad  
chests  became  shrunk;  their  fat behinds  became  flabby;  their  
shining  eyes sunk into their sockets  and their protruded  
stomachs  had become  flat. Funny  words  no longer  provoked  
laughter.  They could  no longer  answer  greetings;  they had 
become  walking  ghosts  whose  souls  had  gone  away  from  their  
bodies.  They  became  preoccupied  with thoughts  of how to 
distribute  their  belongings.  They  also  had  to think  of how  their  
heads  would  roll  on the day  they  were  to be beheaded.
Before  they knew  it, the days rolled  by. Within  these  
days,  the youths  began  to hold  secret  meetings.  When  they  left 
their meetings  they kept sealed  lips and no one had any 
inkling  of their  discussions.  Children  did not leak  decisions  to 
their  fathers,  nor did  they  inform  their  older  brothers.  It was  as 
if the  youths  had  declared  war  on the elders.
On the appointed  day, all the chiefs  wore their most  
expensive  clothes.  Some  had built coffins,  others  had dug 
graves,  and some  had tied the sacrificial  chicken  at the burial  
sites.  That  day,  it became  clear  to all that  all humans  know  they  
would  die but no one  wanted  to know  the day ahead  of time.
42






Anyone  who beheld  those great chiefs in their expensive  
attires  of death  beheld  sorrow.  Those  who  looked  at them  saw 
tears  and  bleeding  hearts.  They  were  not  pleasing  to the eye.
The  youths  did not  mandate  Adajo  Ole to speak  on their  
behalf.  They  did not even  admit  him  into  their  meetings.  It was 
after  the audience  had arrived  at the market  place,  and Adajo  
Ole came  in his regalia,  with  the medicine  men  and  the hunters  
had  surrounded  the people  waiting  to die, that  the spokesman  
of the youth  stood  up and started  to address  the gathering  
thus:
Kabiyesi,  may  you live long.  May you age well for us. 
May the crown  remain  long on your head, may the 
sandals  of authority  remain  long  on your  feet. You will 
reign  over  us for long.  The  king  and all the chiefs  of the 
town,  if we cut the root,  we cut the tree;  if we uproot  the 
root, we uproot  the tree; if we punish  the root, we 
punish  the tree. All rivers in this world  have their  
sources;  all houses  have their foundations.  If the 
foundation  is built with rocks,  surely  the house  will 
. stand,  but  if the foundation  is built  with  sand,  the house  
will certairdy  collapse.  Of all the masters  that exist in und
the world,  the most  insensitive  is law. Of all the systems  
put in  a place  by man  in this  world,  none  is as callous  as 
law. What  pushes  son of man  into prison?  We all know  
that it is law. What  hangs  human  beings  on the tree?  
Certainly,  it is law.  All the youths  of the town  of Ifehinti  
greet  you all. They  greet  you,  and  salute  you  well.  They  
say that the laws of Ifehinti  town  were made  by the 
people  of Ifehinti.  The governing  system  of Ifehinti  
town  came  from  the ingenuity  of Ifehinti  people.  They
43







say that they  have  made  a law that will make  you live 
forever  and you shall  not die a worthless  death.  From  
today nobody  dies with  anybody  again  in this Ifehinti  
town. Let everybody  die on his own and depart  in 
peace.
When  the man ended  his speech,  tears poured  freely  
from  the eyes  of the chiefs  in total  joy on account  of the depth  of 
love  these  children had  shown  to them,  yet they  were  reluctant  
to let the laws  of the land  disappear  on their  own  account.  They  
begged  the youths  to allow  them  die but the youths  refused  
flatly.  As they  were  still arguing  on whether  to die or not, the 
youth  leader  told  Adajo  Ole to instruct  that  the log upon  which  
heads rolled be removed  immediately.  He also sent the 
executioner  who was carrying  the machete  out of the 
gathering.  Since  the matter  went  this  way,  everybody  had  to let 
it rest  as the youths  wished.
In the end,  the chiefs  perished  the thought  of death  and 
prepared  to go home.  So, it is so difficult  to depart  from this 
world! You should  have seen  them  as they sauntered  home.  
Their  lips had dried  as they  hung  their  heads  in thought.  The 
nerves  on their  necks  stuck  out starkly  because  their  stomachs  
were  empty,  their  eyes  had run inside  the sockets,  their  cheeks  
have become  wrinkled  from hunger,  the feet were dry, the 
hands were scaly, the fingers had become  as thin as 
earthworms.  Their flesh had shrunk  considerably.  Some of 
them  appeared  as if they  had  been  nearly stricken  to death  by 
tuberculosis,  some looked  like people  afflicted  by smallpox  
and their  lips became  swollen.  Those  were  hard  times  for all 
the chiefs  of the town  of Ifehinti  and  had  God  not  planted  good
44






thoughts  in the minds  of the youths  of the town,  things  would  
have  been  terrible  indeed.
This is the way of the world,  our people.  What  people  
do not desire  to happen  to them  is what  they condemn  other  
people  to. Just  imagine!  The  deputy  king  spared  no thought  on 
whether  the boy was killed or not after pushing  him into 
trouble.  The king wanted  his deputy  to be killed while  he 
preferred  to be alive. Each of the chiefs  had stepped  on the 
verge  of death  before  running  back.  None  of them  wanted  to 
die  but  the death  of other  people  cut  no ice with  them.
This is how they escaped  death.  If we consider it well,  
we will find that Adiitu-Olodumare  bore the brunt  of all the 
suffering  because  when  the king  instructed  him  and  his father  
not to leave town, he gave him only one pound as 
compensation  for all the suffering  inflicted  on him. There  was 
no plantain  to cut like  before.  All they  had  was  the little  money  
remaining  from  the sale of the snails  that  Adiitu  found  on the 
way from his first trip to Ifehinti  town  and that had almost  
finished.  However,  before  this matter  got to a head,  the tides  
had  begun  to turn  for the better  for Obiri-Aiye.  The land  upon  
which  he planted  the maize  that Adiitu  first brought  was a 
fertile land and he also planted  a little  portion  of yam by the 
maize.  The yam luxuriated  and the okro on the farm had 
grown  green  leaves  like the banana  planted  by the river  side 
that  yielded  its fruit  as at when  due.
Besides  pepper,  all other  crops  were  yet to bear fruits  
but they all appeared  promising,  given the freshness  with  
which  they grew. Even though  the farm was small  in size,  
Obiri-Aiye  had started  running  his mouth  as he started  
boasting  around. He was saying  that when  his maize  was due
45






for harvesting,  he would  eat a part and sell off the other part 
and someone  who had been  rude to him once would  suffer  
because  he would  soon have money  to sue him in the law 
courts  and he would  then send  him to prison,  and whatever  
extra  money  came  from  the farm  he would  buy  two  horses  and 
he and  his wife  would  be riding  each  of them.  His son,  Adiitu,  
must  not ride on them  because  he was still a child.  That  was 
how  he carried  on.
One day, Iponjudiran  took  ill and Obiri-Aiye could  not 
go to the farm  for a whole  week,  but 'Diran  became  well  in the 
second  week  and  her  husband  went  to the farm.  What  he found  
in the farm was not pleasant.  A colony  of grass-cutters  had 
invaded  the farm  and had felled  all the maize  stems,  leaving  
nothing  for the owner  of the farm.  Warthogs  also  went  into the 
farm  and uprooted  all the yams  from the mounds  while  the 
elephants  also  went  there  to severe  the yams  from  their  shoots.  
It was  as if all bad  things  communed  to wreck  Obiri-Aiye.  Even  
on the day Obiri got to the farm, the okro farm was 
overwhelmed  with fruits  and the grasscutters,  the warthogs  
and the elephants  did not touch  the okro. On the third day 
when  he went  back  to the farm,  a deer  had eaten  all the okro  
leaves  in the farm. Obiri-Aiye  and his wife returned  to their  
sorrowful  lives.
46





Four
Adiitu Olodumare Makes  the Forest  His Abode

There  was no money  for sustenance  for Obiri-Aiye's  family.  
The money  he received  from the town  of Ifehinti  had been  
exhausted.  There  was  nowhere  else for this husband  and wife  
to turn to. Their  only child  had nothing  to eat, no clothes  to 
wear  and no company  to keep.  In the end, Adiitu  decided  to 
leave  Ilakose  town.
On a certain  afternoon,  he called  upon  his father  and 
said, 'My father,  I am deeply  grateful  to you  for giving  me life. 
Surely,  if you had been  in this condition  you would  not have  
contemplated  giving  birth  to me. You would  not even have  
been  in a position  to marry  a wife.  But things  have  changed.  I 
tasted  food last yesterday  morning  and you also did not eat 
anything.  My mother  did not swallow  a single  morsel of food  
also.  Therefore,  I want  to leave  town  to go to just anywhere  so 
that  after  my departure,  you and  my mother  will  find  a way  of 
catering  for yourselves.  Goodbye,  my father,  and if God  says 
we shall still set eyes on each other,  then we shall see, but if 
God says this is  the last time  we shall  see each other,  then  we 
shall  meet  in heaven. '
Adiitu's  father responded  to him saying.  My son, 
Adiitu,  where  are you  going?  Where  do you  know  that  you  can 
go? We have  no rich  relation  in a foreign  land  that  you can nm
47







to. Neither  do we have a kinsman  that you can go and live 
with.  If your  mother  hears  what  you  have  just  said,  she will  die 
in your hands  because  even though  we have no money,  we 
have  you.  You  are our  money,  our  farm,  our  land.  You  alone  are 
worth  more than all the material  property  of some other  
people.  I have  been  contemplating  to go back  to Ifehinti  town  
to go and  borrow  money  for our  upkeep.  Please,  my son,  stay.'
However,  Adiitu  had made  up his mind  to leave.  He 
did not say anything  to his mother.  In the first place, the 
mother went  out when  he was talking  with  his father.  In the 
second  place,  he could  not even  tell her; he said if his mother  
ever  heard,  she would  hold  on to him, crying,  because  women  
ruin  important  matters  with  tears.
When  his father  found  that  he would  not  bulge,  he gave  
him  one shilling  and six pence,  bade  him  goodbye  and  blessed  
him. He then went inside the house and began  to weep  
profusely.  Adiitu  went to the market,  bought  a fishing-net,  
plenty  of salt and six boxes  of matches.  From  the market,  he 
headed  for the bush  and  went  on his way,  alone  with  an empty  
stomach,  without  any  knowledge  of his destination.
After  walking  for about  two hours,  he ran into a path  
leading  to a farm.  He found  two big and ripe plantains.  They  
were covered  by leaves.  Someone  returning  from the farm  
must  have  stopped  on the spot and unloaded,  but when  the 
person  was reloading,  he or she did not see the plantains  as 
they had been hidden  by leaves.  Adiitu  picked  the two 
pl^tains,  ate one  of them  on the way  and  kept  the second  one.
As soon as he left the road,  he entered  the bush and 
went  on his way.  He trekked  on tillit  became  dark.  When  it was 
totally  dark,  he waited,  found  a tree  branch  and  slept  on it.
48






On the second  day, he headed  for the bush  again  and 
continued  his journey.  He ate the remaining  plantain,  and 
shortly  after, he found an oro tree with plenty  of fruits  
dropping  from  it. He picked  some  of these  fruits  and  ate them  
until  night  fell. By this time, he was in the depths  of the forest  
and  no human  being  had  ever  gone  to the place  and the whole  
environment  was full of trees  and epithets.  It was peopled  by 
agbe, aluko (woodcock),  partridges,  turtle-doves,  rats and 
squirrels,  big and small  animals.  The  whole  place  was  black  as 
night,  the sky was impenetrable  and the forest  was expansive.  
Again, Adiitu-Olodumare  slept  on the branch  of a tree when  
night  fell.
Now,  on the third  day, he decided  to locate  an abode  in 
the midst  of this  vast  forest.  He wandered  afar  and came  across  
a spring oozing  down from a mountain  top. An upper  
tributary  of the river  was flowing  through  a plain  land.  This  
was  where  Adiitu  found  a site to make  his home.
At this point  in time, he turned  himself  into a forest  
dweller  and lost all hope  of getting  into  a town.  The dance  of 
the city meant  nothing  to him and the drumming  of the city 
found  no place  in his heart.  He became  a neighbour  to the 
monkeys  on the tree,  companion  of the snakes  of the forest  and 
a friend  of the turtledove and  oriri.  For one thing,  Adiitu  was  
not disturbed.  He went  into the forest  and started  setting  traps  
for animals and  by nightfall, he had set six traps.  By morning,  
three of the traps had caught  three rabbits.  Those  rabbits  
provided  his breakfast.  He removed  the rabbits  and reset the 
traps.  He went on and made  six more traps making  twelve  
traps.  When  he went  to check  in the morning,  four  of them  had 
caught  one  squirrel  each.  This  was  how  Adiitu  proceeded  with  
his life,  killing  the bush  rats  and  the squirrels  of the forest.
49







It was  on the second  day  of his sojourn  in this  forest  that 
it dawned  on him  that  he was  in a very  big danger.  One  fateful  
afternoon,  he suddenly  heard  a lion  roaring  in front  of him  and 
another  one roaring  from  behind,  each  appearing  to be closing  
in on him  as it roared.
Adiitu-Olodumare  climbed  on top of a tree, remaining  
dead  silent  in the hope  that one of the lions  would  come  into 
sight  but instead,  it was a leopard  that  he saw and the leopard  
moved  backward  and  went  its own  way.
Where  he perched,  he could  see the bottom  of the river  
clearly  and  when  he first  looked  into the river  he saw a variety  
of fishes  but when  he took  a second  look, he found  dozens  of 
varieties  of crocodiles  swimming  freely  in the river.  Some  of 
them  had  long  and  sharp  mouths,  others  had  mouths  that  were  
not so sharp  but all of them  had  teeth  that  were  as thick  and as 
sharp  as a knife.  All of them  came  upstream,  lifting  up their  
nostrils  and  breathing  heavily.
Adiitu  sat on the tree till nightfall.  When  darkness fell, 
he came down  and ate a squirrel  and the snail that he had 
picked  up. He ate, drank  some  water,  closed  his eyes  and sleep  
took  him  away.
The sun had risen  before he woke  up the next day. He 
could  still have been  sleeping  but for the fact that something  
stood  on his chest,  iron-rod  heavy.  Adiitu  opened  his eyes,  and 
what  did he see?  A python  had folded  up itself  and sat  on his 
chest. Adiitu's  sleep  was sound  because  all his travails  made  
him very  tired  and so he was still as he slept  and the python  
thought  that  it was a dead  wood.  When  it coiled  round  and the 
space  was  comfortable,  the snake  just  relaxed.  Part  of the snake  
sprawled  on the ground.  When  he woke  up and found  the
50





snake, he did not know  what  to do as the snake  coiled  like an 
anthill  on his chest,  stuck  out its head,  rolling  its tongue  at 
intervals  and  watching  the environment.  Adiitu  remained  still 
in the hope that after a while the snake would  leave. But 
instead  of things  to improve  for the witch  mother,  she kept  
giving  birth  to females  and birds  rolled  upon  birds.  Instead  of 
leaving,  the snake  coiled  up the rest of its body,  tail and all, on
After  a while,  Adiitu  was suffocating  under  the weight  
of this  snake  and  when  he could  no longer  bear  it, he decided  to 
change  position.  As he sprang  up suddenly,  the snake  uncoiled  
and  began  to roll on the ground.  As soon  as he sighted  Adiitu,  
it rose  up and  stuck  out  its neck  as if to strike  at his chest  but  the 
man ducked  it and its head went astray.  The snake again  
attempted  to coil round  him and stretched  out in order  to 
break  his backbone  but  Adiitu  did not allow  that  to happen  as 
he kept freeing  his leg each time the snake  coiled  round  it. 
Soon,  the snake  was able to wrap  itself  around  Adiitu's  waist  
and  Adiitu  fell down  on the ground  and  both  of them  began  to 
roll on the ground,  taking  turns  on top of one another,  until  
Adiitu's  body  was  eruneshed  in the mud  of the riverside.
Before  Adiitu  went to sleep the previous  evening,  he 
had sharpened  his machete  and it was as sharp as a kmfe,  
buried  it in the ground  and turned  its sharp  end up slightly  
above  the ground.  His  mindset  was  that  after  he had  slept  off, a 
snake  might  come  to him  and  should  that  happen,  the machete  
would  cut the snake.  He buried the cutlass as deep  as it could  
possibly  enter  the ground  and  however  heavy  the thing  was,  it 
could  make  ihe machete  to sink  further.  However,  the side  the 
snake  climbed  was the opposite  side of where  he buried  the 
machete.
51







The struggle  between  him and the snake  became  very  
fierce  but when  it was obvious  that the snake would  kill him,  
he suddenly  remembered  that he had buried  the machete  in 
the ground.  He laid flat on top of the snake,  held its throat  
firmly  with  all his might  and the snake  was tumbling  around,  
carrying  Adiitu  along  with  it. Soon,  Adiitu  cleverly  turned  the 
snake  in the direction  of the buried  machete,  but  just  before  the 
snake  got to where  the machete  was, it turned  its head in 
another  direction,  flimg  Adiitu  off its back  and he almost  fell 
on his own  machete.  As soon  as he got up, he thrust  his hand  in 
the mouth  of the snake,  pulled  apart  its upper  and lower  jaws  
and as the snake tried  to wrestle  its head  away  from  him, his 
neck landed  on the machete  and Adiitu  deployed  all his 
strength  to press  the neck  on the machete  and  it sank  deep  into 
the neck  of the snake.
Once  he did this,  he knew  he had pulled  trouble  by the 
leg and he sped away  and when the snake  could  not find its 
opponent  he started  to scoop  the soil with  its head. He dug  the 
river  bank  and dug  under  the leaves.  It landed  its head  on the 
rock  and  rolled  it on the sandy  shore.  The river  turned  red  with  
the blood  of the snake.  The  python  did  not survive  the struggle  
and five days  later,  the snake  was found  floating  on top of the 
river,  totally  dead.
Yet it was  like  a day  marked  for trouble  for Adiitu.  After  
resting  a while  from  the fight  with  the python,'  he went  to check  
out his traps. Six of them caught  very,  big rabbits.  He had 
thrown  a net for catching  fish, but instead  of the net to catch  
fish, it caught  jomijoke  (water  snake).  When  it found  this 
creature  on his snare,  he abandoned  the snare.  Adiitu  never  
went  back  to his fishing  net.
52






He then  made  up his mind  to set small  nets  for fish and 
he found  a big fish  log and tied the net around  it. Shortly  after,  
he threw the net inside the river, it cut an aro fish. He 
disentangled  the fish from  the net and threw  the net back  into 
the river.  Soon,  the net caught  a big cod fish. He then  went  on 
top of a boulder  which  stood  out in the depth  of the river.  There  
were  other  rocks  in the river  which  served  as stepping  stones  
for him  to get to this big boulder.  He flung  the net in the river  
and  as soon  as he sat on the boulder  and  thrust  his net forward  
and a part  of his sole was inside  the river,  he found  a creature  
swimming  towards  his foot. He pulled  his leg from  the river  
and found  that it was a crocodile.  The crocodile  was coming  
towards  him with  its mouth  ajar. Adiitu  then threw  the end­
point  of the net into  its mouth.  The crocodile  sank  its teeth  into 
the net's staff  and when  he could  not pull  it out, the crocodile  
dragged the net along.  Problem  brewed  as he was pulling  the 
net from  the rock  while  the crocodile  was pulling  it from  the 
river.  Even  if he was  able  to pull  the crocodile  onto  the boulder,  
how  was  he going  to kill it? Everywhere  Adiitu  went,  he went  
with  his machete  on which  he had tied a rope  which  he flimg  
rlnto his shoulder.  But when  this battle with the crocodile  
began/he  forgot  that  the cutlass  was  on his shoulder  and  when  
he remembered  that he had the machete,  he decided  to dash  
into the river  and go for a combat  with  the dangerous  animal.  
He quickly  thrust  himself  into the river and a rough  duel  
began  between  him  and the crocodile.  The  stick  that  was stuck  
in the crocodile's  teeth  was a major  advantage  for Adiitu.  The 
problem  now  was  where  to cut in the crocodile's  body  that  was 
as hard as stone.  As the crocodile  was flinging  its sharp  tail, 
Adiitu  was dodging  it to avoid  a cut in his flesh.  A big fight
53






ensued in this big pool of water  and all tho fishes  ran into 
hiding  and jomijoke  (water  snake)  fled from the river. As 
Adiitu  grabbed  the crocodile's  neck,  it slipped  out of his hands.  
As he tried  to hold  its chest,  it evaded  the grip.  The clean and 
clear  water  became  muddy  and when  the crocodile  pulled  out 
its teeth  from  the stick,  Adiitu  was in fresh  danger.  If he dived  
under  the river,  the crocodile  would  dive  after  him,  if he swam  
afloat,  the crocodile  would  follow  suit.  In the end,  Adiitu  had 
to run  out of the river.  Who  is eating  and  the dog  is wagging  its 
tail!  Adiitu  was  no match  for the crocodile.
After this incident,  nothing  else of any significance  
happened  to Adiitu that day, although  all manner  of 
dangerous  animals  kept passing  by. Various  snakes  fell from  
the epithets  and animals  roared  to one another  from  the four 
comers  of their  habitat.  Still,  Adiitu  did  not decide  to leave.
From the second  day, he started  setting  traps to kill 
animals.  He searched all through  and found  the den of one of 
the lions  and made  up his mind  to befriend  the lion. He began  
his friendship  plan  with  a deer that his trap cut. He dissected  
the deer  and took  its two hind  limbs and headed  for the lion's  
route  just  at the moment  when  the hungry  lion  was  coming  out 
with  all ferocity.  As he was  arriving  at the mouth  of the den,  the 
lion  came  out  and  as soon  as it saw  him,  it headed  for him  to kill 
him  for food  but  before  it made  contact,  Adiitu  had  thrown  one 
of the hind  limbs  of the deer  to him  and the lion  began  to eat it. 
Before  he finished  with  that,  Adiitu  threw  him  the second  hind  
limb.  As the lion  was  eating  the deer,  Adiitu  disappeared.
As God  would  help  him, Adiitu  found  one dragon-net  
on one of his haunting  expeditions  and  he went  and set the net 
as a trap  on the lion's  path  so that as soon  as the lion sets out of 
its den, it would  fall straight  in the net and it would  get
54






entangled  by it and remain  fixed  on that spot.  Adiitu  tied this 
net to a big tree  near  the lion's  den.  As the lion  wanted  to go out, 
it got entangled  by the net and it was unable  to move.  It 
struggled  but it was impossible.  He remained  there  and could  
not find food to eat. That was how he became  very familiar  
with  Adiitu  as he was the one feeding  him. He was bringing  
food  to the lion  regularly  at its feeding  time.  In a matter  of time,  
they  became  friends  to the extent  that he began  to stroke  the 
lion and they became  playmates.  In about  two months,  they  
became  intimate  friends.  After  this, he released  the net from  
the tree,  held  the net, and  the lion  was  following  him  about  like 
his dog. He trained  the Hon very well. If he heard  a sound  
anywhere,  he would  make  a signal  and the lion would  dash  
there  and  kill  whatever  was  there.
That  was  how  Adiitu  related  to all animals  in the forest.  
He made friends  with a chimpanzee  who could dig out 
anything  from the ground.  It could  carry a heavy  rock and 
uproot  any tree.  There  was  very  little  or no difference  between  
the chimpanzee  and  the man  save  for the hair  covering  its body  
like clothing.  Adiitu  himself  almost  became  a monkey  because  
he was  jumping  from  tree to tree with  the monkeys.  They  had 
got used  to him so much  so that  they  regarded him as one of 
their companions.  He was even throwing  feasts for the 
animals.  He had  regular  meetings  with  a certain  group  of deers  
every  three  o'clock.  He would  leave  food  for them  outside  their  
abode.  They  too always  came  to eat this  three  o'clock  meal.
Adiitu  sojourned  in the forest  for full seven  years  before  
setting  eyes  on any human  being.  He got there  at the exact  age 
Of sixteen  and by the time he met any man for the first time  
after  that,  he had turned  twenty-three.  Nobody  could  see him
55






and believe  that he was a human  being as his face was 
completely  covered  with  hair,  his beard  had grown  wild and 
he looked  very  much  like  a mad  man.
He knew  all the secrets  of the forest.  One day, his lion 
took  him to a certain  place  and when he got there,  he found  
over four hundred  elephant  ivories.  He picked  one of them  
and used it as his walking  stick. For three full years,  Adiitu  
lived on roasted  meat  or roasted  fish. If he found  a snail,  he 
would  roast  and  eat it. If he found  a tortoise,  he would  roast  the 
tortoise  for food.  There  were  no cooking  utensils  to make  soup.
One  day,  Adiitu  made  up his mind  to mould  a pot.  After  
wandering  in the forest  for a long time, he found  clay. He 
fetched  some  clay and headed  for a flat rock.  When  Adiitu  got 
to the rocksite,  he put  the clay  on the ground,  found  a stone  like 
a grinding  pebble  and began  to pound  the clay. He started  to 
pound  and pounded  for about three  hours  until  the clay had 
become  suitable  for moulding  what looks like a pot. After  
some time, he moulded  a very thick pot and burnt  it for a 
whole  day  before  it became  useful  for cooking.
On the day  Adiitu  finished  the stew,  he cooked  with  his 
new  pot, something  happened  to him. Since  he arrived  in the 
forest  he had  utilized  only  one  matchbox  as he hardly  used  the 
matches.  He usually  made new fire from the coal of the 
previous  fire, adding  new  logs.  On this day,  he brought  out all 
his matchboxes  from  within  the hole where  he stored  them,  
spread  them  outside  of his abode  and slept  off. When  he woke  
and went  to inspect  his traps  and  snares,  he did not tidy  up as 
he rushed  into the forest  believing  that he had overslept.  
Before  he completed  his round  of inspection,  there was a 
downpour  and by the time  he got to his abode,  the flood  had  
swept  away  all his matchboxes.
56






Adiitu  raised  up his eyes  unto  the sky once,  twice  and 
when  he looked  up the third  time,  he began  to speak  thus:
Ha! My  Creator,  what  is my fate  in life?
Almighty  God,  what  is my  fate  in life?
Owner  of the day,  what  is my fate  in life?
What  is my  lot among  human-beings?
My  father  looked  for food,  he got  none.
My  mother  looked  for food,  she got  none.
I headed  for the forest  to look  for food.
I became  companion  of monkeys  because  of food;
A neighbour  of lions,  because  of food;
A peer  of baboons  because  of food.
Whichever  way  I must  head  for today.
My creator,  please  teach  me.
After he spoke in this way, he began to search  
everywhere  and after  a long  time,  he suddenly  found  a box of 
matches  which  he had knotted  on his cloth floating  on the 
river,  but happily,  it did not get soaked  with  water.  This  was a 
great marvel  to him. He could not understand  how he 
managed  to tie a matchbox  separately  on his cloth  and  this  had 
happened  since  a long  time  ago.
After  some  time,  Adiitu  left his abode  and  headed  in the 
right  direction.  He kept  walking,  turning neither  to the right  
nor to the left with  the hope  that at long last, he would  come  
across  human  beings  from  whom  he could  seek information  
about  his parents.
Truly,  when  he had trekked  for two full days,  he burst  
into a certain  town  called  Ajedubule.  By this time,  it would  be
57







hard  for anyone  to see  Adiitu  and  talk  to him.  He did  not cut  his 
hair for seven  whole  years  and his beard  which  just started  
growing  when  he got to the forest  had grown  wild as he had 
become  a man. He did not bathe  with soap for those  seven  
years;  he was scrubbing  his flesh  with  leaves  when  he bathed  
in the river.  He had only  a pair  of clothes;  the short  sleeve  shirt  
and the knickers  that he wore to school.  Those  clothes  had 
become  so shredded  that  they  could  no longer  be called  a shirt  
or shorts  as they  had become  like shredded  ropes  of banana.  
His  body  was  jet black;  the hair  on his head  was  bush-wild;  the 
nails on his fingers  and his toes looked  like claws,  and his 
beard  was  bushy.  Crumbled  leaves  and  assorted  ants  took  hold  
of his head.
When  he entered  the town,  everybody  thought  he was  a 
mad  man  but the elephant  ivory  that  he used  as walking  stick  
which  attracted  the attention  of a business  man who first 
talked  to him.  The  businessman  greeted  him  and he answered  
properly.  He sought  permission  to inspect  the ivory  which  he 
carried  and he allowed  him to do so. After  examining  it, he 
offered  to buy it and Adiitu  who did not carry  a kobo  on him 
accepted.  But when  the businessman  offered  to buy it for ten 
pounds  and as Adiitu-Olodumare  wanted  to say that ten 
pounds  was too much, another  businessman  who was 
listening  to them  counted  fifteen  pounds  and  gave  it to Adiitu.
Adiitu  just collected  the money.  The first thing  he did 
was to go to a food  hawker  and bought  a meal  of yam-flour,  
with  six pieces  of meat  to accompany  his morsels  down  to his 
stomach.  He then bathed,  cleaned  up, bought  one buba,  one 
sokoto  and cap. These  materials  were  sown  ready-made  but 
when  he put  them  on, they  were  very  fitting.  These  were  better
58 



than  the banana  leaves  he was wearing  in the name  of clothes.  
He went  to a barber  who cut his hair and he shaved  his beard  
with a sharp knife. He now looked  like a different  person  
entirely.  Naturally  unless  we want  to deceive  ourselves,  Adiitu  
was a handsome  man. Small as his town Ilakose  was and 
wicked  as the inhabitants  were,  the women  of the town  kept  
eyeing  this man. Adiitu-Olodumare:  a man created  by God  
who  brooked  no comparison.
After  renting  a house  and  staying  in it for three  days,  he 
returned  to the forest  in search  of his remaining  ivories.  It took  
him sometime  before  he could  locate  the ivories  as his lion 
friend  who followed  him like a dog and who took  him to the 
spot  had  been  killed  by a hunter  just  about  an hour-and-  a-half  
before  they got to the town  of Ajedubule  on the day he first 
went  to the town.  All the same,  he got to the site by all means.  
There  was no other  town  in the whole  world  where  ivories  
were  sold  for greater  profit. That  was  how  Adiitu  became  a rich 
man.
He kept  going  to the forest  and returning  with  loads  of 
ivory. In about two months,  Adiitu  had made up to two 
thousand  pounds.  Not  long  after  this,  he bought  a plot  of land  
from  one rich  man.  The  man  was  so exceedingly  rich  that,  even  
though  in the spate  of one year,  Adiitu  had made  up to ten 
thousand  pounds,  his money  was nothing  compared  with  the 
wealth  of this man who sold the plot of land to him. It was 
through  the sale of this plot of land that Adiitu  and this man  
became  intimate  friends.  It was a very  deep  friendship.  By the 
time  Adiitu  finished  building  his house,  it became  difficult  to 
determine  whether  he lived  in his own  house  or in his friend's  
house.  The man  took  Adiitu  like a son as his only child  was a 
girl.
59







Just after  four years  of his sojourn  in Ajedubule  town,  
this  rich  man  who  became  his friend  died  only  after  six months  
that  his only  daughter  got  married.
When  they  read  the man's  will,  the following  was  what  
was  written  in it:
This  is the injunction  that I give to those  who  will read  
my will after my death.  I, Itunu-Aiye  Aiyedemi,  Ogo 
Oluwa,  write,  this down regarding  my belongings,  
today,  the thirteenth day of August,  nineteen  hundred , 
and fifty-eight  after  the death  of Our  Lord  and I choose  
these  two people,  Otitokoro  and Ekesubu  to share  my 
property  in accordance  with this arrangement.  I give 
five  hundred  pounds  to my wife,  Ifarada  Ogo-Oluwa  to 
spend  until her death and I leave for her my house 
where  we both live and she should  collect  the rents  of 
the remaining rooms  for ever. I give one thousand  
pounds  to my daughter  in the belief  that she and her 
husband  will  trade  with  it. I also  give  her my  oil depot.  I 
give all my cocoa  plantations  to this daughter  of mine,  
Abegbe.  I also  give  her sixteen-story  building  out of my 
houses  in Ajedubule  with six cars and six trucks.  She 
should  choose  the ones  she likes  best  out of my houses  
and my vehicles  before  any of the other  beneficiaries 
can make their own choices.  My daughter,  Abegbe  
loves  me dearly  and I want  a good  life for her and her 
husband.
I give five hundred  pounds  to Adiitu-Olodumare  
that I have adopted  as a son and I also give him my 
house  in which  gold  is mined  along  with  all my rubber  
plantations.  He should  take twelve  houses,  twelve
60





saloon  cars, six trucks,  after  my daughter  Abegbe had  
made  her own choice. However,  Adiitu  must  make  a 
written  undertaking  that  his first  wife  ever,  must  come  
from Ajedubule  before  he can marry  any other  wife,  
which  must  be ten full years  after. I leave  two houses  
each for each  of my six male  siblings.  My two lawyers  
should  distribute the  rest of my property  which  I have 
not mentioned  as they deem  fit. Each  of these  lawyers  
must be paid two hundred  pounds  every year as 
payment  for their assignment.  These sums must be 
deducted  at the beginning  of every year from the 
proceeds  from  my  property.  
Signing  of the Will:

1. Owner: Itunu-Aiye,  Aiyedemi,  Ogo-Oluwa.
2. Witness: Ilori  Eto-Aiye.
3. Witness: Ajala  Olododo.
4. Draftsman:  Oyepo,  Ogbondiran.


That  was the Will  that the rich man  left behind.  He did not 
know  that  he was going  to die soon  when  he was writing  the 
Will but it was not long after he wrote  it that the creator  
claimed  his soul.
This Will transformed  Adiitu  into a very wealthy  man in 
one  single  day.  All that  the owner  of all these  property  required  
of Adiitu  was  that  he must  marry  his first  wife  from  the town  of 
Ajedubule  and that he must  not marry  another  wife until  ten 
years  after  marrying  the first  wife.  He did  not even  ask him  not 
to marry  more  than one wife. The very second  day after the
61







Will was read,  Adiitu  signed  the undertaking  as the lawyers  
required  of him.
By now you must  be wondering  where  Adiitu's  parents  
would  be at this point  in time and their  condition  since  their  
child  went  away.  Poverty  and  burden  remained  their  lot all the 
days of their  lives.  Ajedubule  was far away  from  Ilakose  and 
could  only  be accessed  through  a boat.  One could  go through  
Ifehinti  town  but you must go with a vehicle  for about  ten 
miles  to Ifehinti  town.  This  boy had no  news  of his parents  in 
all the years  he spent  in the forest  but as soon  as things  turned  
for the better  for him since  he arrived  in Ajedubule,  he started  
sending  money  to his parents  in Ilakose  town.  He was also 
sending  food  and  clothes  to them.
Adiitu's  money  by now  was difficult  to count  because  
the money  he was getting  from  gold mining  alone  was more  
than  a thousand  pounds  per year.  He got ready  to set out on a 
journey  to seek out his father  and mother,  Obiri-aiye  and 
Iponjudiran.  He bought  a variety  of garments,  aran,  damask,  
pure aso oke, sanyan,  etu, atari, adire elepa and so on. He 
sowed  many  wrappers  for his mother  and bought  several  
plates  and bowls,  various  cups and mugs  for drinking palm-  
wine.  He bought  two hundred  and twenty  yams,  fifty  bags  of 
yam  flour,  forty  bags  of gari,  fifty  tins of palm  oil, forty  gallons  
of groundnut  oil, forty  gallons  of melon  oil, ten  baskets  of two-  
lobed  kolanuts  (gbanja),  ten baskets  of five-lobed  kolanuts  
(abata),  ten baskets  of bitter  kola, six bags  of salt, six bags  of 
pepper, six bags  of onions,  six bags  of rodo  pepper,  six bags  of 
tiny pepper  and six bags  of tomatoes. He then  bought  twenty-  
five goats,  twenty-five  sheep,  and twenty-five  rams.  Adiitu  
bought  all these things to celebrate  his reunion  with his
62







parents.  He loaded  them  into a vehicle  and headed  for Ifehinti  
town.  He went along  with two long saloon  cars. He left the 
vehicles  in Ifehinti  town  because  there  was no motorable  road  
to Ilakose town.
They arrived  at Ilakose  at about ten o'clock  in the 
morning.  It was  a great  surprise  for  Adiitu  when  he was  told  by 
the first  person  he met  in the town,  who  was  both  a relation  and 
a neighbour,  that he did not think that his parents  were at 
home  since  he had not seen  them  for a very  long  time  and that 
he did  not  think  that  they  had  gone  to the farm.
Truly,  Adiitu  entered  the house.  The  house  was silent  as 
death  and there  was  no sound  at all. It was after  he had  entered  
the room where  his parents  lived that he knew what had 
happened.  He met  them,  but it was their  skeletons  that  he met 
scattered  on the floor.  They  had since  died.  They  had died  for 
about  three  weeks  before  Adiitu's  arrival.  All the money  he had 
been  sending  to them  had  never  been  delivered.  Huger  killed  
the parents  of Adiitu-Olodumare  and they both died on the 
same  spot.  If one  took  a close  look,  one  would  find  out that  they  
died  in each  other's  arms.
Adiitu  looked  up and down  and  tears  trickled  down  his 
face. He said, 'My father,  ah! My father,  my mother,  ye! My 
mother.  The bones  of this arm is my father's,  the bones  of this 
leg is my mother's.  This chest  bone  belongs  to my father,  and 
these  two skulls belong  to my parents.  Ah! my parents,  I left 
you  with  your  flesh  on, I have  come  to find  only  your  skeletons.  
Even  when  you  had  no money,  at least  you  used  to speak  to me, 
but  now  you  have  lost  your  voice.  Ah! Almighty  God,  I cannot  
fathom  this world.  Ah! My creator, I do not know  the meaning  
of this world;  it is incomprehensible  (It is Adiitu).  My father
63







died  of hunger.  My mother  was  taken  away  from  this  world  by 
hunger.  I am rich,  I am  wealthy,  I have  lands,  I have  houses,  and 
I have  tremendous  wealth.  How  sweet  would  it have  been,  my 
creator,  if this  big dandogo  garment  that  I brought  was  worn  by 
my father!  That my father  was able to wear this arumata  
trouser  that I have brought!  Had my mother  tied this aran  
shawls  that I brought  for her! Had this aran headtie  that I 
brought  been  tied  by my mother!  I am in great  distress,  and I 
am troubled,  my heart  is like  the scum  at the bottom  of a pot of 
corn  drink.  My heart  is as sour as eight-days-old  palmwine.  I 
had great  hopes!  Great,  very  great  indeed!  My hope  was that  I 
would  slaughter  a goat for my mother  to eat, that I would  
slaughter  a sheep  and my mother  would  eat out of it, that I 
would  cook  draw  soup  and  my mother  would  eat out of it with  
hot yam  flour,  that I would  make  bean  cake  for my mother  to. 
eat with cornmeal. I had wished  that my father  would  sit 
down  and my mother  would  sit down,  mixing  fish  stew  with,  
pork  stew,  mixing  chicken  gizzard  with duck  gizzard,  mixing  
liver  with  tripe,  cow  hunch  with  its tongue; in short,  for them  
to enjoy  themselves  as they  should.  Ah!! My hopes  are dashed,  
my  hopes  are dashed,  my  hopes  are dashed!'
'People  of the world,  you  cannot  appreciate  the depth  of 
my sorrow.  Fellow  beings,  you cannot comprehend  my 
frustration  unless  you can understand  the extent  of the worry  
of one whose  hopes  are dashed.  A hopeless  person  is like  one 
who jumped  from  the rooftops  and landed  on nails and the 
nails  pierced  his sole and resurfaced  on top of his foot and the 
man  was  unable  to free  his foot.  He fell down  in great  pains.  At 
the end, people  came,  some  pulling  the limbs,  others  pulling  
the arms  with  all their  strengths  to get his foot out and blood
64






gushed  out from both the instep  and the sole and the pain  
became  unbearable;  that is the situation  of one whose  hopes  
have  been  dashed.  From  today  on, I have  no father  and may  
God Almighty  becorne  my father;  from today, I have no 
mother  and may God Almighty  be my mother;  my Creator,  
please  be my consoler;  my Creator,  be my guide.  All the 
burdens  that  I have  to carry,  please  my Creator, help  me to lift 
them;  all the  journeys,  that  I have  to make,  please  God,  lead  me 
on the way,  go with  me today,  go with  me tomorrow,  go with  
me forever,  my  maker.
-This  was how  Adiitu  spoke  with  sorrow,  tears,  regret,  
pain  and  distress.
However,  the young  man gave his parents  a befitting  
burial. Every single soul in Ilakose  town was well-fed,  
everybody  drank  to a state  of drunkenness.  The funeral  of his 
parents  totally  transformed  Ilakose  town because  Adiitu-  
Olodumare,  on his own,  repaired and tarred  the road  leading  
from Ilakose  to Ifehinti.  Then, he established  a factory  in 
Ilakose  town  which  brought  strangers  to the town  to boost  the 
economy  immensely.  He then established  a free education  
Foundation  in the town  in the name  of his parents  so that  every  
year, twenty-five  pupils  were sent from Ilakose  to other  big 
cities  to study  Humanities  and  it was  free.
Adiitu  then erected  a big statue  in the name of his 
parents.  A big  wall  clock  stood  on top of this statue  giving  the 
time of the day. At the base of this statue  was written  the 
following  words:  This  statue  is named  after  OBIRI-AIYE  AND  
IPONJUDIRAN,  MADE BY THEIR  SON, ADIITU-OLODUMARE.  
The people  of Ilakose  referred  to this statue  as 
'The  clock  of Obiri-aiye  and  Iponjudiran.'
65 





The clock  told them  the time  at regular  intervals;  when  
it was one o'clock,  it would  strike  one, when  the time  was two 
o'clock,  it would  strike  two  and  when  it struck  it echoed  round  
the town with the sound,  gbon-un-un-un,  gbon-un-un-un,  
gbon-un-un-un,  continually.
It was  in Ifehinti  that  Adiitu  lavished  the greatest  sum  of 
money  because  the town was bigger  than Ilakose.  Many  
people  in Ifehinti  could  no longer  recognize  him. In the first 
place,  wealth  and affluence  had transformed  him. Then,  he 
was much  older.  Those  who knew  him before  were greatly  
marveled  when  they found  him in pleasurable  saloon  cars,  
especially  when  they  recalled  that  it was  he they  had  sentenced  
to death  before  God  saved  him.
Since he became  a rich man, the women  of Ifehinti  
would  not let him be. Some  would  drape  their heads,  their  
ankles  and their  necks  with  gold;  they  would  splash  powder  
all over  their  faces,  their  arms  and their  legs;  they  would  drag  
their sandals  to block  him at home,  all the time! As they  
entered  through  the right  door,  Adiitu  would  lead them  out 
through  the left one.  If they  eyed  him,  he would  eye them  back.  
Many  women  were unrelenting  in their  efforts to  destroy  the 
lives  of other  people; when  they set their  eyes  on money  they  
would  lose their  scruples  and their  decency.  They  would  go to 
any  length  to lure  him.
Adiitu  spent  up to one month  in Ifehinti.  town  before  
going  back  to Ajedubule.  On his first night  in Ajedubule,  he 
had  a mysterious  dream.
66





Five

Adiitu-Olodumare's  Wonderful  Dream

On arrival  in Ajedubule,  Adiitu  fell ill on account  of the strain  
on his strength  as a result  of the energy  he expended  on the 
burial  at Ilakose  and Ifehinti.  He found  himself  in a town  
whose  beauty  was difficult  to describe  adequately.  The road  
was built with glass, the walls were all in glass, and these  
glasses were in different  colours.  Some of the glasses  
resembled  garments  of indigo;  others  were like green  leaves  
but whatever  colour  the house  was painted  in would  be the 
colour  of the walls, left and right. The houses  were like 
mansions.  What  was  most  marveling  was  that  the people  of the 
town  all looked  like glasses  so that  if one approached  from  the 
front,  one could  see the person  clearly  from  the rear.  One  could  
even find them replicated  in threes  or fours following  one 
another.
Adiitu  saw  all those  that  had died  before  and those  who  
knew  him while  on earth  embraced  him. Some  people  who  
were poverty-stricken  while on earth had houses  which  
thousands  of pounds  could  not  build.  In his dream,  Adiitu  was 
actually in heaven.  There  was no single  bungalow  and all the 
houses  had more  than a hundred  rooms  each.  The difference  
was that some  houses  which  could  ordinarily  pass for a rich 
man's  house  could  just  belong  to a poor  man  and a rich  man  in
67




the world  appeared  like a servant.  You  could  find  some  highly  
educated  man  on earth  who  became  mere  servants.  There  were  
wards  chiefs,  there  were  kings,  there  were  medicine  men,  there  
were  mullahs  in the Mosques  and all these  people  were  in the 
positions  of domestic  servants.  Each house  contained  more  
than  fifty  people  under  the leadership  of one  person.
It was not that all the people  of note while  on earth  
became  servants  in heaven;  some servants  on earth also 
remained  servants  in heaven.  Some  rich men on earth  were  
also rich in heaven;  some  pastors  on earth  retained  their  high  
office  in heaven  while  some  mullahs  on earth  remained  clerics  
in heaven.
All these people  that Adiitu  saw were still awaiting  
God's  judgment.  The point  was that as soon  as anyone  got to 
heaven,  he would  be told  the kind  of position  he would  retain,  
pending  the time  of actual  judgment.  There  were  better  worlds  
than this world  of ours.  This was how  each  person's  identity  
became  known.  Every  human  being  had his own box of sin 
which  the spirits  in heaven  had kept for him in the box of 
remembrance.  As soon  as each  person  arrived,  he would  check  
out his name  and fetch  his box of sin. It was after  this box had 
been  measured  on scale that  they  would  determine  where  the 
person  would  go. Some  people's  load  of sins outweighed  their  
load of goodness.  Such  people  would  have to go back  to the 
world  and proceed  to live in a world  that was worse  than  our 
world.  They  had the option  of becoming  servants  or going  to a 
world  that  was  worse  than  this  our  world.
Most  people  preferred  to remain  in heaven  as servants  
because  being  a servant  in that  place  was  far more  comfortable  
than being  kings  in our own world.  What  service  did these
68




servants  render  for their  masters?  It was simply  to observe  the 
book  of remembrance  and  respond  to whatever  questions  they  
were  asked.
Of all the spirits  residing  in heaven  there  was one that 
was more powerful  than  the rest and  he was called  Itoju  Emi 
(Caring  for the soul).  Itoju  Emi's  name  was  always  on the lips  of 
the people  of heaven.  One other  word  that was constant  on 
their lips was 'Time.'  Anytime  they spoke,  they referred  to 
what  happened  at a point  in Time.  When  Adiitu  could  not 
understand  this concept,  he asked  to be educated  on what  
Time  connoted.  They  laughed  and told  him  that  one Time  was 
equal  to a thousand  years.  Second  Time  was a thousand  years  
before,and  so on. They also liked this abbreviation,  'O.E.',  
which  translates  to Odun  Enia (one ’s age). For the year 1958  
A.D,  they  would  say'1958  O.E.'
The common  question  that the masters  asked their  
domestic  servants  was when  their people  in the world  were  
due to die so that  they  could  arrange  to meet  them.  The  reason  
was that those  who  were  coming  freshly  from  the earth  never  
got to know  in good time that they had died. They always  
thought  that  they  were  in a dream.  It normally  took  a long  time  
before  it dawned  on them  that they had departed  from the 
world.
Every  year, the angel  called  Itoju Emi distributed  the 
register  of all the people  on earth  to all the servants  in each  
house.  Each  of them  must  have  a copy  of the register.  We now  
write  what  Adiitu  wrote  down  in one of those  registers.  We 
would  not name  names  but we would  give them  one of the 
alphabets  from A to Y. Instead  of saying  'Ajayi'  or 'Oni' or 
'Dada'  we would  simply  say 'A', or we say 'B' or 'D'. This  was 
how  the names  were  arranged  in that  Register:
69




5A: Will die on the 2nd of July, 1990 O.E. no matter  how
hard  he struggled  against  death.
B. The date of the death  of this one will be 2nd January,  
1980  O.E. but he will fall sick on the 3rd of March,  1971  
O.E.  If his relations  refused  to treat  him  for this  sickness,  
Itanju  Emi will instruct  death  to remove  him from  the 
world.
D. This  one will  die in 2020  O.E. if he is well  catered  for. He 
will fall sick on the 4th  of May, 1999 O.E. Itoju  Emi  has 
pronounced  that if they do not provide  a good  doctor  
for him,  he will  command  death  to go and  take  him.
E. The  exact  date  of death  is 2nd  January,  2000  O.E. unless  
he misses  the vehicle  going  from Lagos  to Ibadan  at 
three  o'clock  in the afternoon  on the 3rd of June,  1980  
O.E. If he travels  on that day and that time,  the car will 
have  an accident  and  he will  die.
F. No major  sickness will befall him until  5th September,  
1990 O.E. That  is the appointed  day of his death  and he 
will  depart  the world  in peace.
G. If he does  not enter  the ship that will depart Lagos  for 
Ejinrin  on 8th December  2021 O.E.,  he will  not die but,if  
he enters  the boat of nine o'clock,  he will die, but the 
actual  date  of death  is 4th  February,  2023).O.E.
GB. Itanju  Emi  is likely  to send  death  to take  this  one on 13th
November,  1963 O.E. because  his kinsmen  have no 
confidence  in doctors  trained  in the white man's  
medicine.  Their  belief  is that if wizards  and witches  
have  no hand  in his sickness,  then  he will  survive it!  Yet,
70 




it is a sickness  that requires  surgery;  only a doctor  can 
handle  it. The  exact  day  of death  is 8th  May,  1994  O.E.
K. If  this child's  mother  ministers  on the child for two 
weeks  the strong  herb she was shown,  Itoju Emi will 
certainly  order death to go and fetch him on 24th  
August,  1963 O.E. The actual day of death is 22nd  
October,  2029  O.E.
L. Alas!  If this one does  not terminate  his friendship  with  
his mischievous  friend, that one will poison  him 
through  wine on 7th July, 1977 O.E. Itoju Emi will 
command  that  death  should  go and  take  him.  The exact  
day  of death  is 8th  June,  1989  O.E.
M. He must  divorce  his first  wife.  If not,  the woman  will  kill 
him  on the 3rd of April,  1981  O.E.  The  exact  day  of death  
is 3rd  January,  1999  O.E.
N. If this one does  not give  up alcoholism,  the drink  would  
have destroyed  his liver to the extent  that Itoju Emi 
would  have to order  death  to go for him on 2nd July,  
1985  O.E.  Exact  date  of death  is March  3,2000  O.E.
O. If this one went  to the venue  of a big fracas  that would
take place on 14th August,  1980 O. E., he would  
certainly  die in the fracas.  Actual  day of death  is 7th 
June,  2003  O.E.
O. This  one will  go mad  when  he is exactly  twenty  years  of
age,  that  is, January  1,1996.  O.E.  and  if the ailment  is not 
promptly  addressed,  he will take his own life on 2nd 
February,  1998 O.E. Exact  date of death  is 3rd March,  
2047  O.E.
 71







P. Jealousy  will lead this one to lose his life on 12th  
November,  1989  O.E.;  unless  he does  not  go to his house  
on that  day  because  on his return  from  a journey  on that 
day,  he will  find  a man  with  his wife  in his room  and  this 
will lead him to shooting  his wife and killing  himself  
after. The exact  date of death  is 13th September,  2009
O.E.
R. No major  illness  will  afflict  this one until  his actual  date  
of death.  Exact  date of death  is 13th September,  2019  
O.E.
S. If he goes  to swim  in the sea on 1st January,  2001,  he will 
die.  Actual  date  of death  is 8th  January,  2019  O.E.
S. This one will suddenly  run amok  on the 6th of June,  
1987  O.E.  and  he will  shoot  himself.
T. If he goes  to the farm  on January  2007  O.E. and  he is not 
very watchful,  he will step on a cobra's  tail and the 
snake  will  bite him and Itoju  Emi will instruct  death  to 
go for him. Actual  date of death  is 8th February,  2019
O.E.
U. If this one does  not get inoculated  promptly,  he will  die 
of smallpox  on 9th July, 1986  O.E. Exact  date  of death  is 
30th  January,  2003  O.E.
W. If the mother  of this child  is careless  with  him,  he will  
fall through  the window  on 10th  October,  1964.  Actual  
date  of death  is July  2,2035  O.E.
Y. This one will sleep in heaven  on 31st December,  1999  
O.E. He will not wake as this is his destined  day of 
death.
72




Those  were  the things  that  Adiitu  wrote  on a page  of the 
register  of one of those that had died but were serving  as 
servants  in heaven.  As he finished  writing  this down,  he 
looked  ahead and saw hens,  ducks,  goats,  sheep,  pigeons  and 
numerous  domestic  animals  in an orderly row following  one 
another  gently.  When  he inquired,  from  someone  where  they  
were  going,  he was informed  that they were  going  to line up 
themselves  where  the Creator  ordered  them  to line  up as it was 
time  for morning  praise  worship  to Almighty  God.
Truly,  in a short  while  later,  songs  began and all that were  
present  started  singing  in praise  of God. Doors  sang:  windows  
sang,  the roads  that we trod sang, and all the voices  sang in 
unison.  The  melody  of the song  was  beyond  description.  What  
was most  marvelous  of all was that all the souls  sang  joyfully,  
amidst  laughter  and joy and it was crystaTclear  that  the joyful  
song came  from  the hearts  and that they  .loved  God with all 
their  hearts.  When  they  were  meant  to shout,  they  would  shout  
very  loudly.  When  they  were  supposed  to sing solemnly, they  
would  be solemn.  The  song  was  unmatchably  melodious.
After  this,  Adiitu  saw one of his brothers  that  had died.  He 
was so happy  to see his younger  brother and he desired  to 
show  him where  his father  was  but  he said  that  they  would  not 
go through  a straight  road that led to where  Obiri-aiye  was 
because  he wanted  to show  him a few things  before  they got 
there.  If they  had  wanted  to get there  quickly,  he would  have  
instructed  the glass on the road they were treading  to take 
them there swiftly.  The glass would  have glided  their feet 
gently  and  they  would  be there  instantly.
Adiitu's  brother  took  him  into a big house.  This  house  was 
bigger  than  any  house  on earth.  The people  of heaven  called  it 
Ile Ope (House  of Thanks).  The house,  from  foundation  to the
73






roof,  had railings  with  a bag  hung  on each  railing  and the bags  
were  named  'the  bag  of thanks'  (Apo  Ope).  Everybody  on earth  
had a bag of thanks.  In those bags were deposited  all the 
blessing  that each person  had received  on earth.  If you were  
rich, how many  people  have you endowed  with your  riches  
and how many  people  came  to say thank  you?  How  many  of 
those  people  were  ingrates?  and that only God remarked  the 
kindness  shown  to those  people.  How many people  have  the 
person  given  gifts  on earth?  — all these  were  kept  ih the bag of 
thanks  that  were  all hung  on the  wall.
Adiitu  entered  another  mighty  house. The house  was 
packed  full of boxes  lined  up and called  the labour  of worship  
of human  beings.  Whatever  money  each person  paid for 
worship  purposes  was used  to purchase  the clothes  in each  of 
the bags of worship  and referred  to as the heavenly  clothes  
(Aso  Orun).  All money  paid  by each  Christian  for church  work,  
be it for the payment  of pastor's  salary,  building  constructions,  
and payment  for other church  workmen  were utilized  in 
buying  Aso Orun and kept in the boxes for the person.  
Whatever  church  work done by anybody  was converted  to 
money  and  kept  for him  in heaven.
Inside  these boxes  were kept somethings  referred  to as 
Ako-Okuta-Orun  (white  stones  of heaven).  That  one  grew  like 
yam and was very  heavy  and it was a marker  of the extent  of 
the goodness  of the character  of the person  because  someone  
may  be a good  church-goer  and  may  be worse  than  the devil.
Yet, each  person's  box ought  to be heavy  because  it was the 
yardstick  against  which  the type of heaven  that the person  
would  go after  death  would  be measured. Once  a dead  person  
got to the gates  of heaven,  a heavy  scale  would  be brought  to 
measure  his sins against  his good  deeds.  The Aso Orun  in the
74





box  were  usually  light,  so if it was  balanced  on the scale  against  
his load  of sin, it should  go up the scale.  Ako-Okuta-Orun  was 
what  gave  plenty  of weight  to good  deeds.  The  box of church-  
work  might  be weighty  while  the Ako-Okuta-Orun  might  be 
very  small  and  thus,  its measurement  would  not weigh  much.  
Some  people's  church  work  may  not  be more  than  three  inches  
feet  and  one foot  high  yet its heavenly  stones  might  be heavier  
than  twenty  bags  of cocoa.
The type  of heaven  that one would  go might  not  be certain  
to the  person  at once.  This is because, when  a person  died,  he 
would  be located  in a place  until  God's  judgment  came,  yet 
many people  died several  thousand  years ago and their  
judgments  have  not  been  passed.  Some  of the people  who  died  
recently  had to go back  to another  world  that  was worse  than  
this  our  earth  but  which  was  not  hell.
When  one thinks  of how bad this world  is, it will be 
inconceivable  that one should  go to a worse  earth  than ours,  
but it is a matter  of character.  If one behaved  as well as his 
worship,  certainly  his virtuous load should  weigh  heavier  
than  his load  of sin. If one contributed  money,  works  hard  and 
worships  well  to the recognition  of all and sundry,  the money  
paid  on him  will  be used  to purchase clothes  and the  box will 
be light.  When  his load of sin was put on balance,  it would  
press  his good  deeds  swiftly  down  on the scale.  That  was the, 
end for that  person.  If the load  of sin and goods  were  equally  
weighed,  the person  would  go to the kind  of heaven  we have  
described  which  was  better  than  our  eardr  a thousand  and  four  
hundred  times.  If the good  deeds  far outweighed  the evil  ones,  
the person  would  be sent  to a heaven  that  was better  than  the 
one Adiitu  had just seen. Only God Almighty  knows  how
75






beautiful  that heaven  would  be since the one which  Adiitu  
visited  was  superlatively  beautiful.
They  left this house  for another  place.  This  new place  was 
called  Akuko  Orun (The heavenly  cockerel).  There  was no 
darkness  and the moon  shining  to allow  people  coming  have  
time-reckoning.  Because  of this, Almighty  made  a creature  
called  Akuko  Orun. When  they  entered  the house,  they  saw a 
man  and they  requested  to see Akuko  Orun.  The  man  inquired  
from them if they wished  to walk to the place. 
Adiitu-Olodumare  answered  in the affirmative.  The person  who  
brought  him  and the questioner  burst  into laughter  because  to 
walk  to their  destination  would  take about  six months  and the 
highest  was the tallest  building  in heaven  and on earth  and 
'Akuko  Orun' lived  on top of the house.  He never  left the room  
where  he stayed.
Akuko  Orun's  eyes and nose were exactly  like those of 
human  beings  but his two legs were like cockerel's  with a 
cockscomb  and feathers  on its arms; it was very  tall. It did not 
crow  like a cock  because  its mouth  was a human's  mouth.  This  
was how he shouted:  It is one o'clock...  day three...  second  
month. .. the year  1956...  It is two o'clock. .. sixth  day... fourth  
month. . .the  year  1957..  .human  calculation. ..and  so on.
As soon as those deriding  Adiitu  finished,  they looked  
downwards  on the ground  upon  which  they  stood  and spoke  
to it thus,  'Take  us to Akuko  OrUn.'  They  had hardly finished  
speaking  before  they  found  themselves  in the presence of  that 
creature  which  had eyes and nose like a human  being  and 
cocks  comb  like a cockerel.  He welcomed  them and greeted  
Adiitu  very  well after  which  they  went  to where  they  wanted  
to be.
76





As soon as they got out of the place,  Adiitu  found  some  
people  hawking  food and he requested  that he be taken  to 
them.  When  he got to these  food sellers  he said, 'Ha, I don't  
think  you  have  any  food  that  I would  like to eat.'  All the people  
present  collapsed  into a summersault  of laughter  and one of 
them  answered  saying,  'We have  been  before  the world  came  
to be and  since  existence,  there  is no kind  of food  that  we do not 
have,  so what  do you  want  to eat?'
Adiitu  said that he would  like to eat pounded  yam and 
chicken  stew.  Before  he finished  making  his request,  a dish  of 
pounded  yam and chicken  stew was placed  before  him but 
when  the food seller  wanted  to pass the dish to Adiitu,  he 
could  not move  the plates  as it stayed  glued  to the stall  and  the 
person  asked  him if he had not departed  from the human  
flesh?  And  he answered, 'Not  at all.' The  fellow  then  answered  
saying,  'Then  you cannot  eat the heavenly  food.  I thought  you 
have  left the world.'
After this episode,  Adiitu's  brother  took  him to his father,  
spoke  to the earth  and immediately, they  found  themselves  in 
the presence  of Obiri-aiye,  the father  of Adiitu-Olodumare.  
Adiitu  did not recognize  his father,  and it was not that his 
father  changed  but his skin had transformed  into the tender  
skin  of a little  child.  It was a mirror-like body  of the people  of 
heaven,  as he was a recent  inhabitant  in heaven.  His head  that 
was grey  had become  completely  black  and glossy,  without  a 
single  grey  hair on it. His wrinkled  body  had changed  into a 
fresh  one and  Obiri-aiye  had  become  a little  child  and when  he 
realized  that his son could  not recognize  him, he began  to 
speak:
77





My son,  Adiitu-Olodumare,  I am Obiri-aye,  your  father,  
it is me, it is even me. I thank  you immensely  for the 
good  things  you did in honour  of me and your  mother.  
It was  after  we got  here  that  we discovered  that  you  sent 
a lot of money  to us before  we left the world  but the 
people  you sent did not deliver the money  to us at all. 
They  did not even  deliver  a single  three  pence  to us. On 
the twelfth  day that your  mother  and I tasted  food  last, 
we departed  from  the world  of the humans  and came  
here. This big house  belongs  to us and we have fifty 
servants.  Each  of us has twenty-five  servants  and your  
mother  and  I live  together.  Your  mother  just  stepped  out 
now. She went to visit a friend of hers who live 
somewhere  about  one hundred  and twenty  miles  away  
by human  calculation  but  she would  have  got  there  now  
because  it is not up to a minute  since she left. My son,  
continue  in your  good  deeds.  The  legacy  of truthfulness  
that I imparted  in you, to do unto  others  as you would  
want  them  do to you is  what  you  must  follow;  kindness  
is unprofitable  in the world  but it is very  rewarding in  
heaven.  If someone  is in trouble  and  you  help  him  out of 
it, even  if he does show gratitude,  never  mind,  God  
Almighty  has written it down  for you and it is in Apo  
Ope  and it will add weight  to your  good  deeds  when  it 
is put  on the scale.
Mark  my word,  my son, any one whose  good  deeds  
fall below  standard measure  will go to another  heaven  
that is more  terrible  than your  world!  You just take a 
look at any place  where  many  people  are gathered  in 
the world,  either in the Christian  church  or in the
78





mosques  or a very  important  masquerade  is out on the 
street  and a lot of people  are following  him. What  do 
you  find?  Each  of them  has something  hidden  worrying  
him. Some may have arthritis,  others may have  
headache,  someone  may  have  backpain,  some  people's  
ailments  cannot  be declared  publicly,  yet, no matter  
how  powerful  the king  is or how  rich  the person  is, God  
can instruct  death to remove  him from the world  
whenever  it pleases  him. What  of the troubles  in the 
human  mind;  that a husband  does  things  that  displease  
his wife, and a wife behaves  falsely  to her husband,  a 
rich man cheats  with  his wealth  or a prosperous  man  
humiliates  people  with  his prosperous  hands.  What  if 
someone  just begins to hate the other without  
provocation  or offence?  Or speaks  ill of someone  behind  
his back  or assassinates  the other  person's  character;  the 
world  is filled  with  these  kinds  of things.  In truth,  some  
people  may  rejoice  but the joy of the world  is only  skin-  
deep;  those  with  children  may  have  ho money  to feed,  
those  with money  may have no children,  a man may  
have  money  and a child  but the child  may  turn  out to be 
a dullard  or a rascal,  and  so on. Look,  my child,  what  can 
be worse  than  for a person  to go and  live in a world  that 
is worse  than  this  your  world?
That  is where  he will  be until  the Almighty  pronounces  
judgment  on all things.  And when  do we know  that this 
will come  to pass?  A thousand  years  in the life of human  
beings  is a brief  period  in heaven.  The  Almighty  knows  this 
and he has earmarked  judgment  time beyond  four 
hundred  years,  which  equals  a millennia  of a thousand
79






years  of human  dating  after which  they depart  the world  
and since judgment  began,  yet they are not half-way
before  the birth of Christ.  This is because  some human  
cases  last longer than a year  of the human  calendar.  Some  
take longer  than a year  because  the world  is the abode  of 
treachery  and  there  is no falsehood  in heaven.  My  son,  keep  
on with  your  good  conduct,  it is time  for you  to go now  and 
I will  invite  you  back  another  day and give  you a ticket  that 
will  admit  you  to the court  of the Almighty  God.  So, depart  
now  and farewell.  Ah! You have  not seen  your  mother,  let 
me send  for her and she will  be here  in a minute, wait  for a 
while.
After  he said this Adiitu  replied,  'My father,  I thought  you 
said that the place  my mother  went  was as far as one hundred  
and twenty  miles,  how could  she be here in a minute?'  Obiri-  
aiye laughed  and said,  'That  one is not difficult  for those  of us 
in spirit  who  are different  from  you  people.  We can take  a step 
in Lagos  and  land  in Kano,  we can  lift our  feet  from  Sokoto  and 
step  down  in London.'  Having  said  this,  he spoke  to a wall  and 
in a minute,  Iponjudiran,  Adiitu-Olodumare's  mother  
appeared.
Again,  Adiitu could no longer recognize  his mother,  
especially  since  she wore  the kind of garment  that his father  
wore  and  the skin  of his mother  was  no longer  as wrinkled  as it 
was before;  it was now fresh  and glossy.  The hair on her hair, 
which  had started  graying did not have  a single  grey  and her 
flesh  was  fresh,  cool  and very  attractive.  After  Iponjudiran  had 
told  him  who  she was  and  that  they  were  now  heavenly  people
80






Adiitu  was still in utter  disbelief.  Obiri-Aiye  then  said to his 
wife Iponjudiran,  'Iponjudiran,  let us transform  ourselves  to 
our former  selves  for him to behold.'  In a jiffy, they  both  
changed  to their  former  selves;  the ragged  top on Obiri-Aiye  
and his shredded  trouser,  his dry cheekbones,  thin from  
hunger  and his toad-like  skin  because  he was not able to buy 
soap to bathe, all materialised.  It was the same with  
Iponjudiran.  Her  shawl  was torn  on one side,  her head-tie  had 
shrunk  to the size of trouser-rope  with age, her body was 
rough,  her cheeks  was  bony,  the veins  on her  neck  stuck  out  like 
a fork-knife,  her eyes sank inside  the sockets,  the hands  were  
lifeless,  the chest  was skeletal  and the bones  of the neck, back,  
sides  were  bare  and could  be counted  from  the outside.  When  
Adiitu  saw his parents  in this shape,  he burst  into tears as it 
reminded  him  of the type  of suffering  they  went  through  while  
on earth  but he was now persuaded  that they were his real 
parents.
After  his father  went  back to his heavenly  form and his 
mother  did the same,  they resumed  talking.  His father  said,  
'Adiitu,  we transformed  so that you can recognize  us but we 
are no longer  living  a life of suffering.  It is a thing  of joy for us to 
see that you are living  a better  life than  we lived.  I know  that 
you are not yet married  but it will be the sister  of a certain  
friend  of yours;  she is  the one Almighty  made  for you,  just as 
she destined  your mother for me. Do you have any further  
questions  to ask,  because  our  time  to return  is due? '
Adiitu  replied  and said, 'Father,  I have  one more  question  
to ask. Father,  when  you said that the creator  had started  
judging  human  beings  for well  over  a thousand  years  and that 
he had not got half-way  with  the judgment  of those  who had
81







lived  in die world  before  the birth  of our  Lord,  why  did it have  ^
to take  that  long?'
Again,  Obiri-aiye  answered  and said, 'My son, there  is no 
partiality  in the ways  of our God, the Almighty.  He does  his 
things with utmost transparency.  Before the Spirit of  
Judgment  pronounces  anyone  guilty,  he would  have  shown  it 
to all the creatures  of heaven  that  truly,  the person  is guilty.  All 
witnesses  will be meticulously  cross-examined  and all
creatures,  living  and non-living,  will be able to speak  before  
God  Almighty.  That  is why  it takes  so long;  the tree will come  
out to testify  that  it is the instrument  made  into  a club  to hit the 
head  of someone.  The leather  will step out  and say that it was 
its skin  that  was  made  into  a shoe  which  a man  used  to kick  his 
wife  until  she  had  a miscarriage.  The  nail  will  testify  that  it was 
drilled  into someone's  head to allow robbers  carry all his 
property  away;  the rope will say that it was used to tie a 
woman  to a tree to enable  them  steal all her belongings.  The 
machete  will  give  witness  that  it was  deployed  by a husband  to 
cut down  his wife  till she died.  Various  herbs  will assemble  to 
testify  that  they  were  the ones  concocted  by a senior  wife  to kill 
the  junior  wife;  some  of the herbs  will  say  that,they  were  mixed  
together  to make  an innocent  man  mad;  the pepper  will  testify,  
vegetables  will testify;  okro  will testify;  salt will testify;  onion  
will testify;  tomato  will testify;  melon  will testify.  So will,  all 
manner  of things  bear  witness  against  human  beings  and that 
explains  why the judgment  of each individual  person  take
such  a long  time,  my son.' >
After  Obiri-Aiye  had  responded  this  way  and  there  was 
nothing  left for his son to ask again,  he greeted  his son and 
escorted  him  out  of the house  and  handed  him  over  to a certain
82





man  to guide  him  back  to the world.  The  person  then  lifted  him 
on his shoulder  and flew  away. After  a while,  they  arrived  by 
the side of a river  that looked  like the sea but the water  was 
crystal  clear.  There,  he picked  Adiitu,  held him upside  down  
and threw  him inside  the water.  By the time  Adiitu  surfaced  
front  the water,  he found  himself  on his bed. So, it was all a 
dream!
83






Six
Adiitu  Courts  Iyun-ade

Adiitu  had this puzzling  dream  in Ifehinti  town  where  he was 
performing  the funeral  rites of his parents  but soon  after,  he 
went back to Ajedubule  town where  he was residing.  His 
wealth  was  sprawling,  so much  that  it became  difficult  to value  
it as his cars were  innumerable,  so were  the.countless  numbef  
of houses;  the ones  he bought  were  too numerous  to count  as 
his wealth  continued  to multiply.
Now, Adiitu  had a friend in Ajedubule  known  as 
Ademeto.  The name  of this friend  of his aptly describes  the 
man.  Ademeto  was a man  of taste  and  he was a true  friend.  He 
was a man  well created  by God,  even  though  his wealth  was 
not as much  as Adiitu,  yet there  was no single  year  that  he did 
not make  about  a thousand  pounds,  which  was like a pound  
when  placed  by Adiitu's  wealth.  Yet he was not envious  of 
Adiitu,  he never  spoke  ill of him. He did not backstab  him  by 
speaking  well  before  him and planning  evil  behind  his back.  If 
he bought  a trouser,  he would  buy same for Adiitu.  If he 
bought  a cap, he would  buy one for his friend.  They were  
inseparable;  they  were  like  the tongue  and  the mouth.
Ademeto  had a younger  sister. Remember  the Iyun  
beads?  Let me describe  Iyun  for you; Iyun  is a very  beautiful  
bead  and it is commonly  found  in king's  palaces.  This  girl was
84






so beautiful  at birth that the word  'iyun'  had to supply  the 
prefix  of her  name  to become  Iyunade.  Derision  apart,  this  lady  
was a beautiful  woman.  She was light-skinned  and fresh.  She 
was not unduly  fat and not lanky.  She was slim  and fairly  tall. 
All that  makes  a lady  attractive  could  be found  in this lady;  her 
eyeballs  were  crystal  bright,  not glowing  red like the  eyes  of a 
snake.  If you saw her forehead,  you would  conclude  that the 
Almighty  made  hers  specially,  with  a slight  black  line.  Her  lips 
were  not unduly  thin yet not thick  like a washbasin,  her teeth  
were as white  as the sky and her legs were not thin like a 
grasshopper's  legs yet they  were  not as thick  as the elephant's.  
The head was neither  shapeless  nor flat nor oblong.  The 
Creator  made  it moderate and fitting.  When  you  behold  Iyun-ade
from  the front,  she will attract  you, if you admire  her from  
the rear,  you  will desire  her. She walked  the earth  with  stealth,  
gliding  with  dignified  ease.  Just  as the Almighty  endowed  her 
with  physical  beauty,  so did he endow  her with  natural  grace.  
If she tied an aran  shawl,  it would  sit well  on her, if she tied a 
common  cloth,  it would  be good  to look at, not to talk of her 
wearing  aran or damask.  Ah! God created  her without  a 
blemish;  she talked  gently,  laughed  gracefully,  and she did not 
talk without  thought,  not like women  who talk like men,  
howling  like the  monkey  on the tree. God did not leave  a bad 
spot on the girl. Moreover,  the father  was well-to-do,  and the 
mother  was comfortable.  She was a sibling  of Ademeto  whom  
she loved  without  comparison  as he could  do just anything  
that  she demanded  for her.
The second  year that Adiitu  got to Ajedubule  was the 
year  Iyunade  travelled.  She returned  after  four  years  and it was 
during  the period  that  she was away  that  Adiitu  and  Ademeto
85






became  friends.  From  the very  day  that  Adiitu  set eyes  on Iyun-  
ade,  love  enveloped  him  like a hen  envelopes  her chicks.  If love 
falls  on one,  it would  get  up, if it intoxicate  one,  it would  clear.  If 
love's epilepsy  feat caught  one, it would die down but 
whosoever  love  envelopes  is in trouble .
Adiitu  was so completely  enveloped  by love that he 
could  no longer  spare  any thought  for any other matter  aside  
Iyunade.  If anybody  passed  by, he would  quickly  steal  a glance  
just  in case  it was  her and if anybody  was coming  from  behind,  
he would  cast a backward  glance  thinking  she was the one 
coming.  There  was no other thought  on his mind than the 
thought  of Iyun-ade.  He had  a difficulty,  as a prominent  man  m 
the town,  to discuss  romantic  issues  with  just anyone  and his 
friend  and confidante,  Ademeto  left town  on a week  journey  
the day  after  Adiitu  beheld  Iyun-ade.
Before  Ademeto  , arrived;  however,  Adiitu  had taken  a. 
step. His thinking  was that, given  his wealth  and prosperity  
which  made  anything  he said  taken  with  importance,  Iyun-ade  
would  consider  it an honour  that  he could  even  be thinking  of 
her for marriage.  So he wrote  her a letter.  This  was the content,  
of the letter:
Opopoigbadun,
Ajedubule,
24th  August,  1958.
My  beloved  Iyun-ade,
I have  something  to tell you  and  I am certain  that  it will 
please  you  very  much.  I would  have  waited  for  Ade (a short  for 
Ademeto)  but I felt it was better  for me to settle  the matter  
before he  arrived.
 86 





I want  you to meet  me at nine o'clock  five days  from  
today  in one of  my houses  which  you should  name;  whether  it 
is my ten-storey  building  house, or the eight-storey  one which  
I built  for thirty  thousand  pounds  or the five-storey  house  
built  for twenty-thousand  pounds.  Then, I want  you to name  
the kind  of  pleasure  car that  I should  send  to bring  you;  either  
my small  car bought  for three  thousand  pounds  or the one that  
is a little  bigger  worth six  thousand  pounds  or even the very  
big  one  worth  ten thousand  pounds.
This  is the end  of my message.
I remain  yours  till my dying  day,
Adiitu  Olodumare

That  was how  Adiitu  wrote  his letter  and I want you to take 
note  of the elements of pride  in the letter.  In the first place,  he 
had scarcely  made  the acquaintance  of Iyun-ade  and he was 
already  calling  her 'My  beloved  Iyun-ade'.  In the second  place,  
it was  obvious  that  what  he said  he wanted  to discuss  with  her 
was  marriage  because  he said  he would  inform  Ademeto  and, 
moreover,  he said  he was  for her  till death  took  him  away.  How  
was  he sure  that  Iyun-ade  would  wish  to marry  him?  Upon  all, 
what  was Iyun-ade's  business  with  the costs  of his houses  and 
cars?  After  considering  all these,  Iyun-ade  paid  Adiitu  in his 
own  coins.  She gave  him  a one-line  answer:

Dear  Adiitu,
I cannot  meet  you  as you  said,  
Iyun-ade
87



When  Adiitu  saw  this one-line  response,  he sank  down  
on his buttocks.  It was as if someone  carried  him up and 
smashed  his back on the ground,  then began  to drag him 
around.  Adiitu  was greatly  worried, especially  since  the girl's  
love was topmost  on his mind and what he considered  
important  was  a mere  trivia  in the sight  of the lady.
Adiitu  was greatly  disturbed  throughout  that  day. If he 
wanted  to talk  to his servants,  it was done  by shouting  at them.  
He could  not eat, he could  not swallow  a morsel  and there  was 
no one he could  confide  in beside  Ademeto,  the lady's  brother,  
who  was  away  and  was  yet  to return.
On the day Ademeto  was to arrive, Adiitu sent 
messages  to his house  almost  ten times  and  each  time  he asked  
that he should  make  sure he came  to see him as soon as he 
arrived.  It was already  dark  by the time  Ademeto  arrived  but 
as soon  as he got the messages,  he headed  straight  for Adiitu's  
place  and he was totally  surprised  that  his friend  had shrunk  
so much. On  entering,  he shouted,  'Ha! My friend,  is anything  
the matter?'  Adiitu said, 'There is nothing,  yet there is 
something,  let us go inside  the room.'
Once  they entered  the room,  Adiitu  said, 'Ademeto,  I 
am telling  you, love has enveloped  me.' His friend  burst  into 
laughter  sayings  'Adiitu,  love has enveloped  you, how?'  
'Look,  I say that love has enveloped  me; I can not lift my arm 
and I can not lift my leg.' Adiitu  replied.  Ademeto  then  asked  
him, 'Whose  love?'  He replied,  'It is her, I said  the love of your  
sister.' Ademeto  asked, 'Which  one among  them?'  Adiitu  
replied,  'Do you  have  any  other  beside  Iyun-ade?'
88




But  Ademeto  loved  his friend  very  much,  so also did he 
love  Iyun-ade  and  he was sure  that  if both  of them  got married,  
it would  be a good  thing for Adiitu  and Iyun-ade  as well.  If a 
good  thing  was  heading  toward  Adiitu,  he would  not divert  it 
away, but no matter  how beautiful  Iyun-ade  was, if her 
character  was not good he dared not lead his friend on. 
Ademeto  knew  the kind of benefit  that would  emerge  from  
such  a coupling  and he promised  to help  his friend.  When  he 
asked  him if he had mentioned  it to the lady, he replied  by 
producing  their correspondence  and handed  it over to her 
brother.
When  Ademeto  read the letters,  he reproached  Adiitu,  
saying  that nothing  offended  his sister  more  than arrogance.  
And  the kind  of arrogance  that  Adiitu  showed  in his letter  was 
the most  irksome  to Iyun-ade.  He however  promised  to assist  
his friend  and  warned  him  not  to take  any  further  steps  on that 
matter  without  consulting  him.  They  parted  that  day.  Ademeto  
went  home  and  Adiitu  went  to sleep .
Iyun-ade  saw her brother  the next  morning.  As soon  as 
she saw  and greeted  him,  she asked  him,  'Have  you  gone  to see 
giraffe-Neck?'  Ademeto  asked  her, 'Who  is so called?'  Iyun-ade  
again  replied,  'Ah, my brother  how  can you say that  you don't  
know  giraffe  neck in this town,  your one and only friend?'  
Ademeto  then  said,  'It is Adiitu  that  I know  as my real  friend  in 
this  town.'  Then  Iyun-ade  shouted,  'Yes,  he is the giraffe-Neck,  
that  is what  I call  him,  or don't  you  see how  long  his neck  is, like 
that of giraffe?'  Ademeto  then,  shook  his head in surprise,  
grunted  and shook  his head  again and  remarked  to Iyun-ade  
once  more,  'Iyun-ade!  Iyun-ade!  Iyun-ade!  Hepa!  We will wait  
and see the man  you  will marry  with  the way you just abuse
89






every man! ’ Their mother  who overheard  them speaking  
joined  ip, 'Who  are you abusing  again?'  When  she heard  that  it 
was Adiitu,  she could  not believe  it because  there  was none  
other  like Adiitu  among men,  finer than the fish in water,  
Iyun-ade  stepped  out boldly  and repeated  herself,  'It is true 
that  I abused  him  and  called  him  giraffe-Neck  because  his neck  
looked  like the neck  of a giraffe  to me.' Her  mother  said,  
'Iyun-ade, Adiitu's  neck, that Adiitu's  neck is as long as giraffe's  
neck?  I am afraid  for you. You have  gone  too far, your  father  
never despised  anybody.  Look at me, your mother,  I have  
never  spoken  ill of anybody  behind  his back.  For anybody  to 
describe  Adiitu's  neck  that is as beautiful  as that of the cob, as 
too long,  is incredible!'
That was all they said on the matter  that day and 
Ademeto  did not reveal to her sister that he had heard  
anything  and she too did not say that anybody  wrote  her a 
letter before his return. Each kept the knowledge  to 
him/herself . But  Adiitu's  neck  was  not longer  than  those  of his 
peers;  Iyun-ade  just wanted  to insult  him. No part of Adiitu's 
physique  was either  too small  or too big beyond  the ordinary  
as he was simply  a sight to behold  and women  sought  his 
favour  even  though  he never  succumbed.
Adiitu  was a very important  person  in the town  who  
hardly  went  out except  once in a while  that  he went  to see his 
friend,  the Prince  and then, of course,  Ademeto.  It was well  
after two weeks  after this matter  came  up between  him and 
Iyun-ade  before  he went to visit Ademeto.  Even though  
Ademeto  came  to his  house  everyday,  he was  a very  shy  person  
and  he did  not  want  to set eyes  on Iyun-ade.
After the second  week however,  Adiitu  went to his 
friend's  house  and saw Iyun-ade.  He greeted  her and she
90




answered  him very well. After  that, he resumed  his regular  
visits  because  Iyun-ade's  love  tarried  in his heart.
He went there one day and he and Ademeto  were  
playing  the game  of ayo and  were  defeating  each  other  in turn.  
Suddenly,  Iyun-ade  who was watching  the game  intervened  
on reflex,  telling  Adiitu,  'Build  up your  Odu,  add  this  to it, push  
that to him, play your Odu, now, now, now your Odu has 
scored  five. Take this one again, score this one, it is good  
strategy,  play  the second  Odu,  protect  your  home,  chase him,  
chase  him, chase  him,  it has scored four.  Push  that one to him.  
Let him take that one score.  Yes, now score your own two, 
chase  him, chase  him, take those  two.' That was how they  
played  the Ayo game  and when  they  resolved  it, Adiitu  won.  
Ademeto  did not know  when  he said, 'It is husband  and wife  
that  defeated  me, not  Adiitu  alone.'
The second  day after this game,  Adiitu  took another  
wrong  step. Owing  to the outcome  of that game,  Adiitu  began  
to believe  that Iyunade  was in love  with  him and that she was 
willing  to marry  him.  He then  sent  something  to her. Ademeto  
had told  him  not to take any action  on the matter  without  first 
consulting  him but love had enveloped  him and he became  a 
dog  that  did not  hear  the hunter's  whistle.  Love  enveloped  him 
and  he no longer  behaved  like a normal  person;  he began  to act 
in a confused  manner,  just  to show  his love  to Iyunade.  The  list 
of the items  Adiitu  sent  included  six bales  of aran  cloth,  various  
elepa  clothes  in sixes;  six of iteko,  six female  underwear,  six 
women  pants, buba  dress  of various  kinds  in sixes,  iborun  in 
sixes;  same for shoes,  gold-earrings,  gold bangles.  Same  for 
necklaces,  all in sixes.  He put all  of them  in one big car and 
headed  for Iyun-ade's  house.
91






When those things arrived,  Ademeto  was angry  
because  his friend  did not tell him beforehand  and Iyun-ade  
was angry  because  she did not know  why  he would  send all 
these gifts to her. Iyun-ade  actually  wanted  to return  all the 
items  but  her brother  remembered  that  his friend  had  told  him 
how  deeply  he loved  his sister.
Adiitu  never  concealed  the matter  from  his friend  and 
anytime  he was  with  Ademeto  alone,  the matter  must  come  up 
for discussion,  'Ademeto,  your  sister's  love  has enveloped  me.'
Ademeto  asked  his sister  to reply  and  thank  him  but  she 
should  let him  know  that  she was not very  pleased,  in fact she 
was annoyed  with  Adiitu,  on account of the great  quantity  of 
the presents.  When  Iyun-ade  was replying,  she again  went  
beyond  limits  without  confiding  in her brother  before  sending  
the reply.  This  was  what  she wrote  to Adiitu-Olodumare:

25th  August,  1958.
My  dear  Giraffe-Neck
The way I begin this letter  must  come to you as a surprise  
because  this name,  Giraffe  Neck,  which  I have called  you, is 
not the name  by which  people  know you. I called  you that  to 
let you know  what  you are worth  to me. Some  people  seeking  
your  favour  may  be eulogizing  you, saying  you are handsome  
and by so doing,  they  dress  you in a garment  of  pride  and you 
accept  it; they  put  on you the damask  of  vanity  and  you accept  
it. They  have  now  dressed  you in the  flowing  garment  of  pride  
so much  so that  it has become  an ordeal  for you to know  the 
right  things  to do. Your friends  dare  not  tell you  how  your  neck
92






is; your associates  dare not show you the kinship  between  
your  neck  and  that  of  the Giraffe.  Now  you  have  adorned  it and 
you  saunter  around  with  the air of  arrogance.
Let us go to the  facts.  What  is between  you and  me that  
made  you send  me these  various  gifts?  Then,  why  do you send  
these  things  to me in sixes  to signal  your  intention  to attract  
me in a manner of proverbs!  Please  perish  the thought  that  I 
can marry  you in future.  Me and you, Adiitu? That  was how  
you wrote  the other  day that  I should  come  and meet  you at 
nine o'clock  in the night. I want to let you know  that your  
money  means  nothing  to me. To hell with  you, your  long  cars 
land  your  six bales  of aran  clothes.
If you want to give me a present  as a friend  to my 
brother,  I can understand;  if you want  to entertain  me as a 
guest  without  any element  of pride,  I will accept.  If you had 
given me a tin of powder,  you would have seen how  
appreciative  of you I would  have been and I would  have  
elevated  you before the world. Never forget, Adiitu-  
Olodumare,  that  nothing  angers  the Almighty  God  more than  
pride.  It is a sin before  God  and  it is written  before  the spirits,  
and all the thousand  demons  in the forest  abhor  pride all 
through.
A long  speech  leads  to lying.
My  speech  will  not  end  as long  as your  long  car,
I am yours  truly,  
Iyun-ade
This was the content  of Iyun-ade's  letter to Adiitu.  
Adiitu  took the letter without  any anger and replied  with  
another  letter  which  showed  a lot of wisdom.  The letter  read  
thus:
 93



Opopoigbadun,
Ajedubule,
25th  August,  1958.

My  dear Iyun-ade,
I thank  you immensely  for your  letter  which  I received  
today  and I am most  grateful  for it. I was initially  surprised  
that you started  the letter  with abusive  words,  but after a 
little  thought,  I was  not  so angry  any  more.
In the first instance,  your calling  me Giraffe-Neck  
shows  me that  you are a good  girl who  says  things  as they  are 
in her mind.  Also,  I have  found  out that  the insult  you passed  
on me was to cleanse  me of  the pride  that  you think  I have  and 
not to abuse  me for its own sake.  I consider  it an important  
thing  for one's  woman  to be able to speak  the truth  to one no 
matter  how  bitter  it is. It is a very  good  thing  for one to have  a 
woman that  one  can trust  absolutely.
You have  said  yourself  that  if I had  sent  something  small  
to you  it would  have  gladdened  your  heart  but  please  note  that  I 
did  not  send  those  things  to you in order  to hurt  you. The reason  
is that  I love  you very  genuinely.  But  one thing  is that  you were  
the one that  mentioned  the idea  of marrying  or not  marrying  as I 
did not write  that  in my letter  and  I did not engage  anybody  to 
speak  to you on my behalf.  Yet, my advice  to you is that you 
should  speak  with  caution  for  the sake  of the future.  In truth,  you 
are exceedingly  beautiful  and endowed  with a lot of  wisdom.  
Moreover,  your  parents  are the calibre  of people  that  one would  
like to have  as in-laws  because  they did not pamper  you; they 
nurtured  you very well and did not protect  you when  you did 
things  that  are untoward.  Yet, in all these  endowments  of  God  to
94





you, you do not possess  the power  of God  Almighty.  Thus  you 
can talk of today,  but you do hot know  what  tomorrow  will 
bring.  If you  say  you  won't marry  me and  God  Almighty  destines  
you  to marry  me, what  can  you  do?
In conclusion,  I thank  you  for your  letter  and the great  
wisdom  that  you have  taught  me by it and  I will  keep  it in my 
left  hand  so that  I don't  eat  with  it.
I am yours  truly,
Adiitu-Olodumare

This  was the reply  that  Adiitu  gave  to Iyun-ade.  When  
Iyun-ade  read it, it was a matter  of great  marvel  to her. But, in 
spite  of this, a woman  will always  be a woman.  Her reply  to 
Adiitu  again  contained  insults.  It was  very  brief.

Dear  Adiitu,
I thank  you for your letter but I want  you to know that  
Almighty  God  is not  as stupid  as you are and  will  not  give  my 
hand  in marriage  to a man  like  you.  If you are the only  man  left 
in the world,  I would  rather  die without  a husband  than to 
marry  you.
I am yours  truly,  
Iyun-ade
This was the letter  that she wrote. Adiitu  did not reply  
this  letter.  However,  Iyun-ade  was  greatly  disturbed  as she was 
sneaking  around  to make  enquiries.  She went  to a herbalist  
who divined  for her because  various  men have sought  her 
hand  in marriage  and she was already twenty-four  years  old.
95






She did not mention  Adiitu  but when the medicine  man  
divined  for her, the man  he described  bore  a little  resemblance  
with  Adiitu.  She also  inquired  through  sand  divination  and  the 
man who was described  bore no resemblance  to Adiitu.  She 
consulted  an astrologer  who did not talk about  Adiitu  at all. 
She consulted  a palmist  whose  statements  were  confusing.  She 
went  to consult  a man  who  lived  in the forest  who  was said  to 
fast for fifteen  days  every  month  and  had  not known  a woman  
for ages  as he was a very  old man  and his eyes  had sunk  deep  
into the socket.  The man described  a man that resembled  
Adiitu  a little but mentioned  no names.  In the end, Iyunade  
decided  to leave things as they were without  further  
consultations  with anybody  as God had concealed  from  
people  what  would  become  of them  in the future.
Adiitu  did not desist  from  visiting  his friend,  Ademeto.  
At times,  he would  sight  Iyun-ade  and  at other  times,  he would  
not. They  were  neither  friends  nor enemies.  But the minds  of 
women  are very  deep,  like  the depth  of the ocean  and  its depths  
are difficult  to fathom.  What  you  reckon  that  they  are thinking  
about  is not what  they  are thinking  about  and what  you  expect  
that they  will do is not what  they  will do. Only  a few women  
are reliable because  the kind of men  you think  they will love 
are not  those  they  will  fall in love  with  and  what  you  think  they  
will do is what  they  will  not do. At times,  when  Adiitu  goes  to 
Ademeto's  house  and greets  Iyun-ade  she would  answer  with  
a grunt  but at other  times  the way  both  of them  would  laugh  
with a roar, one would  think  that they had become  husband  
and  wife.
Something  happened  on a certain  day. One evening,  
Adiitu  asked  his friend,  Ademeto,  to be expecting  him  the next  
morning,  at about  ten o'clock.  Before  daybreak  of the next
96




morning,  Iyun-ade  had started  bathing  and she was not 
normally  an early bird. After she had her bath, she took a 
longer  time than  usual  to make  up. She rubbed  her face, her 
forehead,  her fingers  and  her toes,  and  she went  on to paint  her 
lips,  and  even  her  tongue  and  spent  up to an hour  in front  of the 
mirror  admiring  herself.  When  she tied her wrapper,  it was a 
white  aran, pure white  that made  white  things  beautiful  to 
behold.  It was  very  attractive.
When  Adiitu  too came  in, it was  as if they  had  planned  it 
together.  He wore  a damask  cloth  whose  colour  was close  to 
indigo.  It was made  into gbariye,  very full, with a damask  
trouser  to match.  His hat was folded,  pointing  sky-ward.  He 
put his gold  watch  on his left wrist  with  a sandal  that covered  
the whole  foot. No man  would  have  met Iyun-ade on  the way 
that day and would  not have stolen  a second  glance  and no 
woman  would  see  Adiitu  and  would  not look  at him  more  than  
once  because  those  two  were  a pair  of exquisite  beauty.
As Adiitu  was about  to enter  his friend's  house,  he met 
Iyun-ade  at the entrance.  Iyun-ade  only greeted him with  the 
information  that,  'He is in the compound.'  She  meant  Ademeto.  
As Adiitu  walked  into the compound,  he felt that he should-  
look  at Iyun-ade  once  more,  so he turned  around.  As he did,  he 
found  Iyun-ade  also looking  at him  and their  eyes  met.  Adiitu  
smiled but Iyun-ade  eyed him contemptuously.  What  
Ademeto  was doing  in the compound  required  that Adiitu  
should  sit with  him. Iyun-ade  came  into the compound  up to 
ten times  after  that.  At some  time,  she would  come  looking  for 
a plate,  at other  times,  it would  be salt, then again  she would  
look for a mixer.  At these  times,  Adiitu  had to stand  up from  
where  he was sitting  to allow  Iyun-ade  search  for whatever  it 
was  that  she was  looking  for. Even  Ademeto  acted  in a way  that
97






showed  that he wanted to give both of them ample  
opportunity  to chat with each other  because  many  times,  as 
soon as his sister came in, he would  excuse  himself  on the 
pretence  that he was going  to fetch  sornething  from  the room.  
On one occasion,  Ademeto  took  Adiitu's  hat and said that he 
was going  to compare  it to the one he just bought  which  was 
inside  his  box  in the room.
As Iyun-ade  was searching  for things,  she carried  the 
pot of soup  and opened  it, then  wanted  to bring  out uncooked  
commeals  from  inside  a pot that was put on the rafters  and it 
appeared  as if she could  not reach  it. Adiitu  then  brought  a big 
stone so he could  stand  on it and ask Iyun-ade  to climb  on his 
back  to be able to fetch  the commeal.  Iyun-ade  climbed on his 
back,  the opened  pot of soup was behind  her, and as Adiitu  
stepped  on the stone,  and  pulled  the pot, the stone  on which  he 
stood shifted  ground  and the pot of commeal  collapsed  on 
Adiitu's  head  like a hat. Instead  of Iyun-ade  to help him out, 
she burst into laughter  and as she was laughing,  she was 
stepping  back.  Unknowingly,  she stumbled  on the pot of soup  
and landed  inside  the pot of soup.  When  she stood  up, her 
bottom  \\^s  soiled  and  her white  aran  wrapper  had  turned  red. 
As Adiitu  was stmggling  to remove  die pot of commeal  on his 
head,  Iyun-ade  was pulling  her buttocks  from  the pot of soup.  
When  she looked  at her buttocks that was completed  oily and 
saw that Adiitu  was laughing  at her, she became  ashamed  of 
herself  and started  raining  blows  on Adiitu.  When  Adiitu  did 
not mind  nor seized  looking  at her, she put the staff  mixer  and 
hit Adiitu  twice  on his back.  Adiitu  started  to run  and  Ademeto  
who  had heard  the noise  of the fight  and was coming  outside,  
collided  with  Adiitu  at the door.  Ademeto  fell down  and  Adiitu  
stepped  on him  and walked  away.  Iyun-ade  also stepped  on
98




him and gave  Adiitu  the chase.  As Adiitu  was  negotiating  his 
way out of the compound,  he collided  with Iyun-ade's  
grandmother and  she fell down  but both  of them did  not look  
at her  as they  just  increased  their  pace.
There  was  a hill very  close  to Ademeto's  house,  on top of 
which  there  was  a slope  which  ran  unto  a river  at the feet of the 
hill. It was a great  marvel  that  both  of them  could  climb  the hill 
with  such  ease  but as Adiitu  was about  to reach  the peak  of the 
hill, he met some  women  carrying  gourds  on their  heads  and 
were  climbing  the hill from  the other  side.  As Adiitu  paused  to 
look at them,  Iyun-ade  who  was unaware of his brief  stop fell 
on him and was rolling  down  the slope  of the hill and Adiitu  
who was running  to avoid colliding  with the women  side­
stepped  and fell down,  colliding  with  one of them  who  in turn  
collided  with the second  person  who collided  with the third  
person  and they all rolled  on along  with  Adiitu.  It turned  out 
that  Iyun-ade  was  rolling  downhill  on one side  and  Adiitu  was 
rolling  downhill  on the other side. When  Adiitu  got to the 
bottom,  he went  straight  to his house.
By the time Iyun-ade  got to the foot of the hill on the 
other  side,  she continued  running  and climbed  back  to the top 
of the hill. When  she got there,  she did not find the person  she 
was chasing,  so she was  just  running  about,  looking  for  Adiitu.  
As she was  doing  this,  a woman  came  out. She  had  gone  to steal  
and the people  from  whom  she had stolen  were  chasing  her. 
When  she saw Iyun-ade,  she hid in a corner  and the people  
chasing  her could  only  find  Iyun-ade  who  was  running  around  
and they ran after  her. She was not aware  of anything  except  
the sound  of stampede  behind  her until  they caught up with  
her and started  beating  her, tied  her  hands  up behind  her, put a 
load of clothes  on her head  and headed  for the police  station.
99





'What  have  I done,  what  have  I done?',  Iyun-ade  was shouting  
until  they got to the police  station.  When  they got there,  they  
stated  their case that she came  to steal from  their  house  and 
that  was  why  they  arrested  her.
When  the police  asked  Iyun-ade  to make  a statement  
she had nothing  to say other  than that she and Adiitu  were  
running  after  each  other  and  she looked  forth-ray  and  back  but 
could  not find  Adiitu  as he was  nowhere  near  the place. 'Where  
is Adiitu?  Where  is Adiitu?  Please  help  me find  Adiitu?  Please  
help me look for Adiitu,  Adiitu  and I were playing,  Adiitu  
where  are you?  Oh,  Adiitu  o... Adiitu  o...'
The  police  then  sent  somebody  to go and  look  for Adiitu  
and as Adiitu  was  not  unknown  to them.  When  the person  they  
sent told him that Iyun-ade  was at the police  station,  Adiitu  
thought  that  she had gone  to file a case  against  him  and  he sent 
back  a message  that  he was  not coming  and that  it was a matter  
that  they  could  settle  privately.
When  the message  was delivered,  immediately,  Iyun-ade
asked  for a piece  of paper  for her to write a note  to Adiitu.  
As they brought  her the paper  and a writing  material,  she 
wrote  a pleasant  letter  to Adiitu  in this  manner:

My own  dear  Adiitu,
Police  Station,
Ajedubule,
July  7,1958.
Our little play had landed  me in trouble.  I am at the 
police  station.  Please  come  and  release  me.
I remain  yours,
Iyun (IYUN-ADE)
 100




As soon  as Adiitu  got the letter,  he did not even  wait  for 
his driver to drive  him. He quickly  picked  his long  saloon  car 
and headed  for the police  station.  On his arrival,  the police  
began  to pay  respects,  'Welcome  sir' and  when  Iyun-ade  asked  
him to tell his own part of the story and he made  his own  
statement,  it complemented  Iyun-ade's  statement  and the 
police  agreed  that Iyun-ade  was mistakenly  arrested  and  they  
released  her.
When  Iyun-ade  left the police  station,  she went  straight  
to her house.  Adiitu  even offered  to take her home  but she 
refused.  It was three  hours  after  she and Adiitu  went  chasing  
after  themselves  before  she got to the house  and the people  at 
the house were totally  oblivious  of what had happened.  
Everybody  was  waiting  angrily  for her and  Adiitu  because  the 
old woman  whom  they  collided  with  fainted  and  it took  quite  a 
while  to revive  her. It was  not until  Iyun-ade  started  narrating  
the whole experience  before the people  knew what had 
transpired.
Ademeto  just  laughed  at both  of them  saying,  'That  was 
what  should  happen  to you  both  except  for the  back  of my  head  
that is swollen.'  Everybody  sustained  an injury  from this 
episode;  the old woman  that fell down  had a broken  arm that 
she could  not lift, Ademeto  sustained  a swelling  on the back  of 
his head,  Iyun-ade  who  was running  after  Adiitu  had  a broken  
leg and  was  walking  around  like  a lame  person,  and  Adiitu  had 
sustained  a bruise  on the-nose  from  the pot  that  fell on his head.
Adiitu  took some  time off before  going  to Ademeto's  
house  because  his bruised  nose  did not heal  on time  and when  
it got healed,  it was white  and it did not go back  to its normal  
colour  in good  time.  As a result  of this, he did not want  to take
101






his nose to Ademeto's  house  saying,  'Iyun-ade  is a terrible  
rascal'  while  she would  be calling  him 'the man with  a white  
nose.'
Right from that point, Iyun-ade  had fallen ill and 
Ademeto  did not want  to inform  Adiitu  because  it was Adiitu  
and Iyun-ade  that were chasing  each other  which  led to this 
problem.  The treatment  that she received  from those who  
accused  her of stealing  was beyond  what she had ever  
encountered,  considering  the fact that  she was a child  that  was 
not  exposed  to any  kind  of suffering.
From what seemed  like a minor  illness,  Iyun-ade's  
illness  became  really  worse.  She  became  thin  and  being  one  not 
endowed  with  plenty  of flesh if one saw her, one would  not 
think  of her as beautiful. The  bones  of her legs and arms  stuck  
out visibly  and you could  count  the veins  on her neck.  All the 
ribs,  bones,  eye sockets,  upper  jaw  and  the lower  jaw  stuck  out. 
There  was no more  flesh  on her body  and she could  no longer  
walk  unsupported.
There  was  no native  medicine  man  or magician  that  had 
not been  invited  to see her; and in the end, they  had to mform  
Adiitu.  He advised  them  to call in one doctor  who  was finally  
invited.  On a certain  morning,  Adiitu  heard  the cry of his 
friend  on his way  to his house.  'War!  War!  War!  War  is upon  me! 
War  is upon  me! War  is upon  me! ' Iyun-ade  had  fainted.  Adiitu  
ran out and headed  for Ademeto's  house.  Publicly,  the doctor  
informed  Ademeto  that he did not think that Iyun-ade  can 
survive  and that she would  die before  nightfall  on the same  
day. Everybody  started  to cry but  Adiitu  did not cry;  instead  he 
was  in deep  thought.
Adiitu went back home. Inside his bedroom,  he 
removed  all his clothes  and  was  stark-naked.  He laid  flat on his
 102






belly and started  to call on the Almighty  God like this: 
"Almighty  God,  my Creator, you  have  never  allowed  me to be 
disgraced  anywhere  on this earth.  Please  do not let me fall into 
disgrace.  My Creator,  I have taken  my sacrifice  beyond  the 
crossroads,  I have pulled  trouble  by the legs and have  landed  
inside  the morass.  How  must  it be told? How  can it be heard  
that  I had a hand  in the death  of my friend's  sister;  the sister  of 
the friend who loves me most on this earth? Ah! Please  
Almighty  God, save  me from  this matter  on the ground.  God,  
the fount of blessing,  save me from this matter,  the Great  
Commander,  save me from  this matter,  my Creator,  save me 
from this  matter.  The invisible  God,  save  me from  this matter.  
The Most  High,  please do not fail to save  me from  this matter.  
The  Most  Holy,  please  save  me. Most  Wonderful  God,  save  me. 
The  maker  of the world,  save  me surely.  The First  One,  save  me 
certainly.  The last One,  you will surely  save me. Owner  of the 
world,  save me surely.  Owner  of heaven,  certainly  save me. 
The  entire  world  cry to you and  you save  them.  The Christians  
call you, you save them.  The Moslems  call you and you save  
them.  You  save  Sango  worshipers.  Orisha  worshippers  call  you 
and  you  save  them.  Oya  devotees  call and  you  save  them.  Why  
will mine  be different  that  you will not save  me? My God,  my 
King,  my Saviour.'
That  was how  Adiitu  called  on God, the King,  and the 
Almighty  never deserts  those who call on. him and he 
answered  Adiitu  instantly.  As Adiitu  was about  to leave  the 
house,  he remembered  that  he was told that a new  doctor  had 
just arrived  in the town  of Ajedubule  and that he was very  
skilled  and there was none other like him in the whole  
neighbourhood.  He took  his car and headed  for the doctor's
103






house.  The fellow  agreed  to go but there  was no fuel in his car 
but  Adiitu  took  him  in his own  car and  they  went  to Ademeto's  
house.
When  the doctor  got there,  he said that Iyun-ade  had 
only three  hours  left on earth  but that he had a 'reliever'  that 
was  made  like a heart  which  he could  use to replace  Iyun-ade's  
heart  if he could  open  up Iyun-ade's  ailing  heart.  If he could  
finish  the job before  three  hours  it meant  that  Iyun-ade  would  
live but if he could  not then she would  remain  quiet  forever.  
Everybody  waited  to see what  God  would  do.
After two-and-a-half  hours,  the doctor  took a deep  
breath  as he finished  work.  From  that  moment,  the lady  started  
regaining her health.  After  a whole  month,  she had regained  
her  health  completely.  Iyun-ade  had  regained  her  beauty  and  it 
was  as if God  turned  the sickness  into  a cleansing  soap  to reveal  
her glowing  beauty.  The eye that beheld  Iyun-ade  beheld  a 
paragon,  swaying,  radiating,  stealthily  walking  and soft-  
spoken. Indeed,  God  showed  grace  in her  body.
It was after she became  healthy  that she knew  what  
Adiitu  did for her  because  all the while  Adiitu  was  making  the 
arrangement  for the doctor, Iyun-ade  was unaware  of 
anything.  When  she got the report,  she was grateful  to her 
benefactor.  Since  then,  everybody  observed  that  Iyun-ade  had 
begun  to love  Adiitu  the more.  Something  came  as a surprise  to 
the whole  world.  By now, Iyun-ade  had tunned  twenty-four  
and  Adiitu  was  twenty-eight  but  neither  of them  had a partner  
of the opposite  sex. Iyun-ade  did  not  befriend  anybody  and  her 
suitors  were  rebuffed  and Adiitu  did not marry  a wife, he 
ignored  all the women  that  danced  around  him.
There  was something  else. Iyun-ade  was a forthright  
girl. To be forthright  is not the same as being a rascal.  A
104





forthright  person  is one who  could  say anything  which  no one 
else dared  say or behave  in such a way that nobody  would  
because  others  would  be shy  to behave  in such  a manner.
Her unusual  mannerism  stuck  with  her as you would  
find in this her behaviour.  Adiitu  came  to their  house  one day 
and told  Ademeto  that he was about  to celebrate  his birthday.  
He gave one month  notice.  As soon as he spoke,  Iyun-ade  
asked,  'Do you want us to come and celebrate  with you or 
should  we not come?'  Of course,  Adiitu  would  be glad  to have  
her there and he immediately  told her the date and said it 
would  be his pleasure  to have  her  there.
Ademeto  was also glad that Iyun-ade  would be 
celebrating  with  Adiitu.  In the first place,  Adiitu  had done  so 
much  for Iyun-ade  that  if she rejoiced  with  him  it would  show  
that she was a grateful  person.  In the second  place,  Ademeto  
wanted  Adiitu  to become  his in-law  because  of his love  for him.
Ah! Iyun-ade  could also be a rascal! Before the 
anniversary,  Iyun-ade  had gathered  a lot of young  men and 
women  and all of them had brought  whips  from the farm.  
Iyun-ade  then requested  one popular  masquerade  in their  
homestead  to be allowed  to come  out  for that  occasion.
At about  twelve  noon on the D-day,  the masquerade  
came  out. Iyun-ade  held  a whip  and  all her followers,  men  and 
women  also carried  whips.  The masquerade  also carried  his 
whip. Iyun-ade  had hired drummers  that would  beat the 
drums  to accompany  the masquerade  and Iyun-ade  and the 
drummers  were leading  the songs  and the others  followed  
with  the chorus.  When  Iyun-ade  and the drummer say, 'Iyun-  
ade is on her way,'  the rest will answer  and say, 'Giraffe-neck,  
go to hiding.'  This  was  how  the song  went:
105






Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Iyun-ade  is on her  way
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Iyun-ade  is on her  way
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  drummer:  Quickly,  go to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Seriously,  go and  hide
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Long  arms,  go to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Fat  buttocks,  go to hide
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Giraffe-neck,  go hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Iyun-ade  is on her  way
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Carry  pounded  yam  to hiding  
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  And  wraps  of commeal  to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Bags  of rice  to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Delicious  stew  go to hiding
Others:  Giraffe  neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Eh! eh! go to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Ah! Ah! go to hiding
Other:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Iyun-ade  and  the drummer:  Hun!  Hun!  go to hiding
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
106





Iyun-ade  and  the drum:  Gently  gently  go to hiding  
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding  
Iyun-ade  and  the drum:  Quick  quick,  go to hiding  
Others:  Giraffe-neck,  go to hiding
Truly,  it must  displease  Adiitu  because she had abused  
him in that vein  before  Yet he took  care of all those  that came  
with  her,  he even  gave  the masquerade  palm  wine  to drink.  The 
palmwine  was poured  into a bowl  and the  masquerade drank  
it all through  the net covering  his mouth  and the audience  
started  to joke that, 'Fellow  from  heaven  with your guttural  
voice, so you drink  palmwine  in heaven?'  The masquerade  
answered  in his guttural  voice  that they drank  very well in 
heaven.  They  queried  further,  'Is it the spirits  that  tap the wine  
for you?' The masquerade  then retorted,  'It is the spirit  that 
will tap wine for your head to drink.'  Adiitu  gave them  
impressive  hospitality.  Ademeto  was very angry from the 
bottom  of his heart  but he kept  it to himself.  Even  when  Adiitu  
called  him and asked,  'Is the behaviour  of your  sister  decent?',  
he just shook  his head and said, 'Do not speak  at all, and leave  
the matter  for me to handle.'
After a while, Iyun-ade  left the arena with her 
masquerade and her thugs.  Ademeto  remained  behind. When  
Iyun-ade  arrived  home  and the elder  sister  of Ademeto,  Agba-  
Iya heard  the song  that the drummers  and the dancers  were  
singing,  she remembered that Ademeto  once  cautioned  Iyun-  
ade not to abuse  Adiitu  by calling  him Giraffe-Neck  but she 
waited  for  Ademeto  to arrive  to confirm  that  recollection.
By the time Ademeto  arrived,  it was already  getting  
dark,  it was  about  eight  o'clock  in the evening.  When  he arrived
107




and Agba-Iya  asked  him if it was Adiitu  that Iyun-ade  was 
abusing  with the song and Ademeto  confirmed  that he was,  
she just went  to sit down  in her closet  and sent  for Iyun-ade.  It 
is the proverb  of the elders  that  say that  when  a child  grows  up 
to a certain  age, she becomes  too big for spanking  and when  
she does something  wrong  all we can do is to rebuke  her by 
eyeing  her.
Agba-Iya  sent someone  to call Iyun-ade  for her. When  
she arrived,  instead  of the older  woman  to call her and advise  
her on what  she had done  wrong,  she went  inside,  brought  a 
cane  and wanted  to spank  her. As she lifted  up her hand,  Iyun-  
ade bent  down,  seized  her sister's  legs while  the latter  fell and 
hit the ground with  the back  of her head.  Agba-Iya  struggled  
and made  another  attempt  to beat  Iyun-ade  but for the second  
time, Iyun-ade  gathered  her two feet and turned  her u,pside  
down  and she landed  on the ground  with  her head.  In short,  
Iyun-ade  made  her sister  fall and tumble  three  times.  On the 
third occasion,  Iyun-ade  took Agba-Iya's  legs and began  to 
drag her on the ground  around  the compound  until all the 
women  in the house  and her elder  ones started  to beat Iyun- 
ade and whip her before  they could  rescue  Agba-Iya's  legs 
from Iyun-ade's  grip. They gave Iyun-ade  a sound  beating,  
chased  her around  and made  her cry bitterly.  What  she had 
done  was an abuse  of the Yoruba  culture  that one should  not 
raise  one's  hand  to beat an elder.  Although,  if we consider  the 
matter  thoughtfully,  what Agba-Iya  did also was not good  
enough.  You  know  what  made  matters  worse?  After  Agba-Iya  
was rescued,  she was boasting  around.  She was waging  a war 
of words  with Iyun-ade  saying, 'I lifted  her up, I wanted  to 
smash  her head  on the stone but for you people  that came  to
108






separate  us. You should  have  allowed  me to give her a good  
thrashing.'  Give  her a good  thrashing?  They  had to force  her 
legs  out of Iyun-ade's  clutch!
The next morning,  Ademeto  called Iyun-ade  and 
castigated  her thoroughly  and instructed  her to go and 
apologize  to Agba-Iya,  their  elder  sister.  Iyun-ade  apologized  
profusely  to Agba-Iya  for her rudeness  to her but when  
Ademeto  asked  her to go and apologize  to Adiitu,  she refused  
totally,  saying,  'My brother,  I cannot beg Adiitu  at all, please  
allow  me to enjoy  the privilege  that  God  almighty  gave  me as a 
woman.'  In the first  place,  Adiitu  is not my husband;  he is  not 
even  my fiance at all. Assuming  we are married  to each  other,  
then I can beg him but even  that one is impossible.  Secondly,  
how  many  people  in this  town  know  that  my inductive  song  of 
yesterday  was  targeted  at him;  how  many  people  know  that  it 
was him I was referring  to as Giraffe-Neck?  Nobody!  I am not 
mad,  knowing  that his neck  is not long  that I just gave  him a 
name  that  is not his. I did it to help  douse  Adiitu's  pride and  I 
hope  you understand,  my brother.  Then,  of course,  we sang  
abusive  song but what of all the money  I paid to the 
masquerade  and his followers?  Was it small? Won't  all the 
people  who saw me dancing  around  the streets  because  of 
Adiitu's  birthday  celebration  begin  to raise eyebrows  about  
me? Ah! That I should  beg Adiitu-Olodumare  or what?  Not 
me, unless  I am not  my father's  child.'
On his own  part,  Adiitu  was deriding  Iyun-ade  around  
town,  saying  that even if she came  to haul herself  at him he 
would  not marry  her again.  However,  it was all a lie because  
love has consumed  him. Love  has locked  Adiitu-Olodumare  
up and went  away  with  the keys.  He could  no longer  take  his 
mind  off Iyun-ade.
109







When Ademeto  asked why she said it would  be 
impossible  for both  of them  to get married  to each  other  in the 
future,  her answer  was that Adiitu  was too proud  for her 
liking.  It was  as if she knew  what  Adiitu  had  been  saying  about  
her; it is this matter  of pride  that debarred  Adiitu  from  telling  
his friends  the truth  about  his feelings  for Iyunade.
Nevertheless,  since that day, anytime  Adiitu  went to 
Ademeto's  house,  whether  he found  him  at home  or not, Iyun -ade
 would  take good  care of him, as if her love for him was 
increasing.  If he did not meet  Ademeto  at home,  she would  
give him a chair  and ask him to sit down  while  she went  off 
looking  for Ademeto.  She was  behaving  as if she knew  that  she 
had offended  Adiitu.  Adiitu  did not refer to the issue of 
marriage  and she also  behaved  as if the affair  with  Adiitu  was  a 
forgotten  one.
One day, Iyun-ade  had to travel  to another  town  by 
ferry. Ademeto  knew  that Adiitu  was also traveling  by the 
same  ferry  to a destination  that  was  nearer  than  Iyun-ade's  but 
he forgot  completely  to tell Iyun-ade  that Adiitu  was going  
with the same ferry. They  had traveled  for about  two hours  
when  Adiitu  was going  to the toilet  and came  face to face  with  
Iyun-ade  and they both smiled  at each other.  Iyun-ade  was 
ruminating  over this sudden  meeting  while  Adiitu  was also 
wondering  about  the accidental  meeting  and why  his friend,  
Ademeto,  did not mention  it to him. He concluded  that 
Ademeto  must  have  forgotten  but Iyun-ade  thought  that  both  
of them  must  have  planned  it. As they  were  brooding  over  this, 
the sky was getting  darker  with cloud, while the crew  
members  were running  helter-skelter  imploring  the 
passengers  to begin to pray to whatever  God they  
worshipped.  The Christians  in the ferry  had started  kneeling
110







down and praying,  the Muslims  had picked  their  Tesibil  and 
called  on Allah  while  the Orisa  worshippers  were  beating  their  
Orisa  drums.  Sango worshippers  were  beating Sango  drums;  
the Oya worshippers  were  beating  Oya drums  while  the Ifa 
worshippers  were making  Ifa divinations.  Meanwhile,  a 
mighty  whirlwind  was  raging.
Their  prayers  did not calm  matters  and the whirlwind  
began,  lifting  the ferry up and dashing  it to the deeps  and 
water  was gushing  to the ferry. In the long run, the ferry  
capsized.  The ferry  was being  powered  by an engine  but even  
before  the whirlwind  began,  the engine  had  packed  up. Adiitu  
held on to a broken piece  of the ferry  with  his legs inside  the 
water.  This  broken  part of the ferry  was very  long  and  Adiitu  
was unable  to see what  was going  on at the other  side. After  
some  time  when  this broken  piece  had  been  carrying  Adiitu,  it 
birthed  on the beach  finally  and Adiitu  held on to a tree,
planted  his foot firmly  on the ground  and stepped  unto the 
shore.  As he looked  ahead  of him,  whom  did he see?  Iyun-ade!  
She had held  unto  the same  split  ferry  on the other  side. Of all 
the passengers  on the ferry, it was only these  twosome  that 
escaped  death. It was a strange  shore, where they knew  
nobody  and  saw  nobody.
The two of them  just managed  to drag  themselves  unto
the ground  as they  were  very tired,  having  been  stranded  on 
the sea for three  hours.  But Adiitu  never  walked ill-prepared.  
Before  he left home,  he prepared  a rubber  bag, filled  it with  
plenty  of food; cornmeal,  cassava meal  (eba),  yam flour  meal,
all with their variety  of stewed  meat,  fried  in oil and pepper  
and all the while  that the ferry  was tumbling,  the food \vas 
hung  on his shoulder  and  he brought  the food  to that  shore.
 111







When  Adiitu  was fully  rested, he went  to Iyun-ade.  He 
talked  to her and they started  to slap their hands  and give 
thanks  to God  Almighty.  As Adiitu  opened  a wrap  of eko and 
planted  a piece  of chicken  on top of it, Iyun-ade  who  was  dead  
hungry  and whose stomach  was flattened,  needed  no 
prompting  to drag  herself  to the food  and  she  began  to eat.
A man must  always  act as a man. After  they finished  
eating,  at about  four o'clock  in the evening,  Adiitu  walked  
along  the shore to detect  any signal  that would  show  him 
where  they  were.  As he walked  along,  he saw something  that 
looked  like an engine  coming  on the sea and by the time the 
engine  arrived,  it was  nothing  other  than  another  split  piece  of 
their ferry which  had become  entangled  with weeds  and 
ropes.  When  the piece  got close to him, he pulled  it close to 
himself  with  a stick.  When  he pulled  one of the entanglements  
close  to him,  he found  out that something  else was entangled  
with it underneath.  It was a box full of plates,  soup pots,  
candles  and matches.  One of the matches  was dry and  Adiitu  
disentangled  the ropes  further.  When  he pulled  another  one,  it 
turned  out to be a box full of female  dresses,  and  the third one 
was a box of gari, with salt and pepper.  He quickly  rescued  
these  boxes  so that water  could  not penetrate  them  and they  
were  all completely  dry.
Iyun-ade  was  not present  at the site of this discovery,  so 
he ran to give her the good tidings.  Both of them were  
exceedingly  comforted  since they now knew  that they had 
something  to bank on and by the time all these food items  
would  have  been  exhausted,  they  should  have  found  rescue.
That night,  Adiitu  picked  many of the clothes  they  
found  and gave  them  to Iyunade  to use as bedspread.  He gave
 112  





her coverlets  and the ones  that  could  serve  as a pillow.  He also 
spread  one for himself  to sleep  on, covered  himself with  one 
and  made  a pillow  out of one.
As soon  as they lied down,  they  slept  off very  soundly
as they  were  extremely  tired  and it was about  eight  o'clock  the 
next  morning  before  they  woke  up. As soon  as it was  morning  
of the next day, Adiitu  started  to roam  the forest  to see if he 
would  find  the footprints  of animals  for which  he could  set his 
traps  in anticipation  of the time when  their  foodstuffs  would  
run out. Thankfully,  he found  numerous  footprints  of animals.  
On the third day of their arrival,  Adiitu's  trap caught  a big 
grasscutter.  On the fourth and fifth day, he did not make  any 
kill but on the sixth  day, he killed  a huge  ore. That  was how  
they started feasting  on meat and Iyun-ade  was fully  
performing  the duty  of a hunter's  wife.
They  stayed  there  for a full month  without  getting  in 
contact with any human  being.  During  this time,  Adiitu  was 
functioning  as a husband  and Iyun-ade  was acting  as the wife,  
except  that they  had  no sexual  relationship.  One morning,  as 
Iyun-ade  was unpacking  a box, she found  a lot of writing  
materials.  It was as if they both planned  it as each of them  
picked  writing  materials  and wrote.  Iyun-ade  was writing  to 
Adiitu  and Adiitu  was writing  to Iyun-ade  and they both  
handed  in their  letters  at exactly  the same  time.  Let  us examine  
what  they  wrote,  beginning  with  Iyun-ade.
113 






Unknown  Island,  
August  29th,  1958.
My dearest,
What  do you imagine  I will write  in a letter  to you?  
What  do you think  you deserve?  What  is befitting  of  me to do 
to you?  My beloved,  truly,  you did not write  me to marry  you 
today,  and sincerely,  you did not say so by word  of mouth.  
Truly,  there  is no secret  that  we have  shared  but I will say to 
you what  women  hardly  say. I want  to write  what  women  
scarcely  write  and  I will  not wait  for the sweet-nothings  that  
women  usually await  from men.  I want  to tell you that  I am 
going  to marry  you. Look,  Adiitu,  if a snake  bites  one and we 
do not stop  the bleeding  in time,  the poison  will  circulate  into 
the arm,  it will  go to the legs, and  it will  go to the whole  body  
and in the end, it will enter  the heart.  The way snake  poison  
travels  is the way  your  love  roams  around  in my body,  the only  
difference  is that snake  poison  spreads  sorrow  but your  love 
brings  me happiness,  right  from the nails  on my toes up to the 
hair on my head and  further  on to my liver, my gizzard,  my 
kidney  and today,  it has hit the core of my heart and I must  
marry  you.
My beloved,  the Almighty  is greater  than  every  human  
being. I had known  that it might  happen  that we become  
husband  and wife but if anybody  had told me that it will 
happen  so effortlessly,  I would  have said that the person  is 
lying.  To tell you the truth,  I have  loved  you since  a long  time  
ago,  Adiitu.  I have  been  attracted  to you since  the day  I set my 
eyes on you but it is the very  neck  of  yours  which  attracted  me
114 







most  that  I deploy  to abuse  you. The language  of  we women  is 
very different,  very deep, at times  known  only to one person  
and it is that  one that  conceives  the language.  At other  times,  
our language  can be comprehensible  to two people,  at other  
times many  people  may understand  it. All these lie at the 
bottom  of my mind and I have it locked  in the box of my 
stomach  and  I have  hidden the  key very  carefully.  Today  is the 
time  to say  it. I say  it again  with  all my heart,  my dear  Adiitu,  I 
want  you to become  mine.  Become  my husband,  be my head,  
own  me  from  my head,  own  my neck,  be the owner  of  my whole  
body,  be the other  person  aside  God that  I will depend  upon  
completely.
I await  your  urgent  reply.
I am yours today, tomorrow,  next tomorrow  and forever.
Iyun-ade

This was the letter  Iyunade  wrote  and it resembled  Adiitu's  
own,  which  went  like this:
Unknown  Island,  
August  29th,  1958.
My  dearest  Okin,
A bird like okin is rare among  birds.  The okin is more  
beautiful  than them  all. The egret  has a flourish  of black  like 
the sparrow,  it had red spots  like woodcock,  and it has white  
quills  like ologose.  The dove  cannot  perch  where  okin  perches
115


and the oriri dare not chirrup  in the presence  of okin.  
Alapandede  and parrot,  Ibaaka  and Ega, the cattle  egret  and 
the partridge,  odere koko and Asere — all these birds will 
hurtle  together  wherever  okin  perches.  It is greater  than them  
all. It is more prosperous  than they and it is found  with  
prosperous  persons  in prosperous  homes.  Iyunade,  you are my 
okin. There  is none to compare  you with among  women.  You 
surpass  them  all.
What  I am about  to say is already  clear  to you. I have  
said  it before or have  I not said  it? Have  I not said  so? I have  
said it.  I recollect  that  I said  it in my letter  that  God  Almighty  
is greater  than  all human  beings  and  that  he can compel  you to 
marry  me and can command  me to marry  you.  Has he made  it 
compulsory  now or has he not?  Has he compelled  it or has he 
not? Out of all these  people,  none  was saved  except  you and 
me. Which  other  way  can God  reveal  this  to us beyond  this?
Therefore,  Iyun-ade,  I want  to marry  you and I want  
you to accept  it. When  I marry  you, I will carry  you with  
stealth  all the days of my life. You will not lack money,  you 
will know  no suffering  and I will care for you until I die. 
Whatever  you like I will like and what  you dislike  I will 
dislike  and  nobody  can take  your  place  from  me.  Anything  that  
befalls  you befalls  me, whatever  touches  you touches  me and 
nothing  will  mess  you  up in this  world.
Iyun-ade, do you really  know  what  you are worth?  Do 
you know  what  you are worth  to me? You are like a flower  
with sweet  fragrance  which  a man planted  in his yard and 
which entranced  all passers-by  because  of its irresistible  
fragrance.  All those  passing  had to wait  as.they  simply  could  
not go. In the end, they started  looking  for the seed of the 
flower  until  they  finally  found  it and they  all started  to plant
116






the flower  everywhere.  They planted  it in the East; they  
planted  it in the West. They planted  in the South  and they  
planted  it in the North.  That  was  how  they  planted  this  flower  
all over the world,  Iyunade,  that is the quality  of your  
prosperity,  your character  and your beauty,  your smile  and 
your  gait,  which  attracts  everybody  to you. Since  the day  I set 
my eyes on you, your  love  has shrouded  me like a hen shrouds  
its chicks and I can never enjoy this world  without  you. 
Therefore,  it is compulsory  for you to find  out  what  to do with  
me, even  if I am not  handsome,  let me  find  love  in your  eyes  and 
if  my character  is not  good,  please  let it please  you.  I want  you 
to know that if you marry  me, my houses  are yours,  my 
properties  are yours  and everything  that  is mine  will become  
yoursforever.
I have  great  hopes  on this letter  and  please  do not let my 
hope  be like an egg which  falls  and breaks,  do not let my hope  
be in vain.  I beg  you with  all my arms,  I beg  you  with  my legs,  I 
beg you with  my eyes,  I beg you with  my nose,  I beg you with  
all my  houses,  I beg  you with  my property,  and  your  brother  as 
we stand  here  in this unknown  coast.  Let  your  heart  speak  well  
tome.
I await  your  immediate  response.
I am yours  tomorrow,  next  tomorrow,  in hope  and forever,  
Adiitu
Just look at the letters  that both  of them  wrote  to each  
other!  Iyun-ade  took her own letter  by hand to Adiitu  who  
received  it as he was hand-delivering  his own. There  was no 
need  for any  reply  since  they  had  mutually  replied.  When  they
 117  







had both  read the letter,  the one looked  at the other  and the 
other  looked  at the one and  they  ran towards  each  other  at once  
and  wrapped  themselves  in each  other's  arms.
God does his things  with completeness.  On this very  
day, Adiitu's  traps  did not kill any animal and  as soon  as they  
finished  their  rapt  embrace,  his mind  went  straight  to the trap.  
On getting  there,  he found  that  the trap  had  caught  an Etu  bird,  
a bird that is famed for the deliciousness  of its meat.  
Immediately, Iyun-ade  made  stew  and  they  ate and were  fully  
satisfied.
As you  know,  trouble  loves  blessed  locales.  I think  it was 
the spirit  of the devil  that  brought  this about.  The devil  detests  
man and is jealous  of him on a daily  basis on account  of the 
privileged  position  that gave to mankind.  As they finished  
eating,  Iyun-ade  took  a short  walk  along  the island. 'Eh!'  Adiitu  
suddenly  heard  a cry. He called  her name  and there  was no 
answer.  He called  again  but  he heard  nothing,  so he went  down  
along the path that Iyun-ade  trod. On getting  there, he 
searched  the whole  place  and found  nobody  that resembled  
Iyun-ade  and  he started  to comb  the place  in search  of her. He 
searched  and searched  without  a clue. He decided  to go 
everywhere  on the island  to find her. He was determined  to 
search  all the nooks and crannies,  hills and valleys,  hard  
ground  or marshy  ground  until  he was  able  to see Iyun-ade.  He 
was sweating  profusely  and was completely  soaked  with  
sweat.  After a while,  he suddenly  saw a path that led to a 
certain  bush.  He found  that a flat plank  was nailed  on a tree 
standing  on this road  with  an arrow leading  to the road.  This  
was  what  was  written  on the flat  plank:
118






Take  note of this road very well. DO NOT  TAKE  THE  
ROAD;  IT LEADS  TO THE TOWN  OF HUMAN  
EATERS.  THEY  EAT THEIR  POUNDED  YAM  WITH  
HUMAN  FLESH,  THEY EAT THEIR  YAM FLOUR  
WITH  HUMAN  FLESH,  ALSO  THEIR  EBA, FARINA  
MEAL  AS WELL  AS THEIR  CORNMEAL.  THE  MEAT  
ON  THE  HUMAN  ARMS,  LEGS  AND  HIPS  ARE  USED  
FOR MAKING  EWEDU  SOUP, OKRO  SOUP  AND  
VEGETABLE  SOUP. THE HUMAN  LIVER,  LUNG,  
TRIPE AND GIZZARD  ARE ALSO SERVED  ON 
THEIR  MEAL  OF RICE.  IT IS THE HUMAN  SKULL  
THAT  SERVES  AS THE DRINKING  CUP  FOR  THEIR  
WINE,  THEIR  PALM-WINE,  AND WATER.  THEY  
PILE HUMAN  BONES  UP AS THE STOOL  ON 
WHICH  THEY  SIT. A FAT  PERSON  IS IN TROUBLE,  A 
LIGHT-SKINNED  PERSON  IS IN DANGER.  
WHETHER  YOU  ARE  FAT  OR  NOT,  IT IS A REJECTED  
TOWN,  NOBODY  EVER WENT THERE  AND  
RETURNED.  BEWARE!
After  reading  this  notice,  Adiitu  headed  for the place;  his mind  
told him that they  had captured  Iyun-ade.  The road  appeared  
uncatered  for as it was all bushy.  After  walking  for about one 
hour, Adiitu  began to see houses  with thatched  roofs in 
patches  all over  but there  was  nobody  in sight  and yet, he kept  
on walking.  After  a long  while,  he began  to hear  human  voices  
and his mind  told  him that  it must  be a gathering  deliberating  
on Iyun-ade's  death,  so he side-stepped  into the bush  to avoid  
being  sighted.  Truly,  he soon  saw them.  They  gathered  and in 
front  of them  was Iyun-ade,  tied to a tree with oil poured  all
119






over her body and there was only five minutes  remaining  
before  setting  her on fire so that they  could  roast  her and feed  
on her. But they  were  performing  their  ritual,  dancing  around  
Iyun-ade  in accordance  with  their  custom.
What  would  Adiitu  do? He remembered  that  he had  his 
matches  and  knew  certainly  that  if there  was  fire burning  from  
anywhere  these carnivores  would  surely  go and look at the 
place. As soon as fire erupted  in various  places, these  
carnivores  dashed  to their  various  homes  immediately.  Before  
they  came  back,  Adiitu  had  taken  a knife,  cut  all the ropes  used  
to tie Iyun-ade, pulled  her by the arms  and they  began  to run. 
They  ran  until  they  got  to their  chosen  abode.
They  were  both restless  as a result  of this experience.  
How  did these  carnivores  see them? This question stayed  on 
Adiitu's  mind  and  he decided  to go to the spot  where  he found  
that notice just in case he might  find extra  information  there  
that might  be helpful  to them.  As it turned  out, he found  
something  useful,  looking  down  at the foot of the notice,  he 
saw  something  else  written  there  thus,
IF YOU  WANT  TO LAST  ON THIS  ISLAND,  WALK  
SIX FEET  TO YOUR  LEFT,  THEN  LOOK  TO YOUR  
RIGHT  AND  YOU  WILL  FIND  ONE  NARROW  HOLE,  
THIS HOLE LEADS  TO THE TOWN  OF 
CARNIVORES  AND IT IS THROUGH  THIS HOLE  
THAT  THEY  CAN  SEE  YOU.
Adiitu  walked  six feet to the left and then  looked  to the 
right  and he saw the hole.  It was dug by the carnivores  from  
their  town  to the island,  and on their  side,  they  slid a mirror  on 
it which  made  it easy  for them  to see anything  in the distance  of
120






six hours  away  from  them.  That  was  why  they  could  not easily  
find out that the two of them  were  there  because  they  did not 
walk in the range of the hole and when  they both passed  
through  the place, it  did not fall within  the observation  period  
of these  carnivores.  Adiitu  then filled  up the hole very well,  
with  the help  of Iyun-ade.
When  they  became  less restless,  they  got ready  to sleep.  
Adiitu  took two coverlets  and wanted  to prepare  a joint  
sleeping  place for them  both.  But Iyun-ade  did not agree.  She 
refused,  saying,  'Diitu, my own Diitu, listen to me, let us 
persevere  and get home  before  we start  sleeping  on the same  
bed  when  my people  will  know  me as your  wife  and  you  as my 
husband.  Somebody  well brought-up  must  not behave  in a 
disgraceful  manner,  an important  person  must  not  behave  like 
a scallywag. By the grace  of God  Almighty,  we shall  surely  get 
back  home.'
Adiitu  did not argue  with  her but as he stood,  Iyun-ade  
took the clothes  from him saying,  'You are doing  my work,  
have  I not been  preparing  our sleeping  place before?  Why  is 
today different?'  She took the clothes  and prepared  two 
separate  places  and  they  slept  off.
For two whole months,  they resided  on that coast  
without  seeing  anybody  and nobody  heard  anything  about  
them.  They  ate gari  for so long  that  cassava  almost  germinated  
on their heads.  On the very day that they ran out of gari,
salvation  came.  They  suddenly  saw  a fishing  boat  coming  from  
a distance  and it appeared  to be heading  towards  them  but 
after a brief while,  it made an about-turn.  They  shouted  and 
shouted  but the fishermen  did not hear them. Adiitu  then  
jumped  into  the river  and  swam  up to them.  When  he got  there.
 121







he narrated  the story  of their  long  stay  at the coast  to them.  The 
fishermen  praised  God  that the carnivores  had not  consumed  
them.  They  told  him  that  this coast  was  known  as Ikupade  and 
it was on the outskirt  of the town of the carnivores  and 
whosoever  they  found  was  in great  danger.
These fishermen  then went back to pick Iyun-ade.
picked  the rest of their  belongings  and took  them  to the vehicle  
park  where  they  would  find  a vehicle  that  was  heading  straight
to Ajedubule.
The town  was thrown  into pandemonium  on the day 
they  arrived  at Ajedubule  as everybody  had  written  them  off as 
dead. They met Ademeto  and the parents  of Iyun-ade  in 
mourning  attires.  The same went for Adiitu's well-wishers.  
When  Iyun-ade  was narrating  their story to Ademeto,  he 
almost  got confused  because  she did not call Adiitu  by name,  
instead,  she called  him 'my own'.  'My  brother,  I said  when  the 
carnivores  took  me before my own  came,  it was my own  that 
took a knife  and caught  all the ropes  that they  used  to tie me. 
Look  at me,  my  brother,  you  must  thank  my own  very  well.  My 
dear  one, please  help  me call my own  to come  and narrate  the 
story  to my  brother.  Where  are you?  My own,  come  and tell the
story  to my  brother.'  And  so on.
Shortly  after  they  arrived,  Adiitu  sent  people  to go and 
seek  the hand  of Iyun-ade  in marriage  on his behalf.  Without  
spreading  the story  like a mat on the ground,  their  marriage  
was fixed  for three  months  after their arrival.  They  saw each  
other  everyday  within  these  three  months  as Adiitu  went  to
Iyun-ade's  house  on a daily  basis.
However,  one small matter  almost  led to a quarrel  
between  them.  There  was  a man  whom  Adiitu  trusted  so much  
in the town  of Ajedubule  whose  name  was Esu-lehin-Ibeji.  He
122


was  in charge  of most  of Adiitu's  business,  indeed,  he was  next  
to Ademeto  if Adiitu's  friends  were to be put on scale of 
proximity.  When  Adiitu  was on the coast,  he made  sure that 
the business  ran smoothly.  As soon as he arrived,  he gave  
account  of all the money  he made  in his absence  and gave  it to 
him  without  any  loss.  The  number  of houses  he had  bought  for 
him  or the number  of transit  vehicles  commuting  from  town  to 
town  cannot  be counted.  So also were the numerous  saloon  
cars that he had  bought  for Adiitu.  In truth,  he worked  under  
Adiitu  but he actually  passed  for a close  friend.  This was the 
letter  he wrote  to his boss  on one  fateful  day:
Ajedubule,
Opopo  Idarudapo,  
Septembers,  1958.
My  own  dear  Mr  Adiitu,
I rejoice  on the event  of  your  coming  back  to meet  us all 
and I am  full of  prayers  that  Almighty  God  will allow  you to  
eat the fruits  of your  labour.  It is my wish  that  you reap the 
fruits  of your  labour  and enjoy  it until  you are old enough  to 
kiss the world  goodbye.  You know  yourself  that  if we were  to 
point  at those  who  would  not  wish  that  any  harm  come  to you 
in this town, I would  be one of the  first  few to be mentioned.  
You could  see that all the while  that you were on the coast,  
your  business  was  not  hampered  and as soon  as you arrived,  I 
handed  over  all the money  we had made  to you. I counted  the 
sum  of forty-thousand  pounds  which  I handed  over  to you.
123







What  I am about  to say  is very  difficult  but  I must  say  it 
without  being  afraid  of its consequence.  A man should  not 
advise  his  friend  not  to marry  a woman  but  a woman  that  will 
harm  you  should  first  of  all harm  me.
This Iyun-ade  that you are planning  to marry  brings  
distress  to me. How  can it be heard  that  the woman  you want  
to marry  is the person  sleeping  in different  houses  with all 
kinds  of men. All through  last week,  I am not sure that she 
slept  more  than  twice  in their  houses  as she was sleeping  with  
one man down here in my neighbourhood and  I saw her with  
my own  eyes.  Once  she saw  that  I had  caught  her  in the act, she 
quickly  ran to my house  and invited  me to her house.  See, my 
dear  master,  as soon  as I got to her house,  she took  me into her 
bedroom.  This  would  have  been  a major  temptation  for me if  I 
were  not a trusted  friend  of yours  who loves  you dearly.  But  I 
refused.  I, who have eaten your  pepper,  eaten your oil and 
eaten  your  salt,  refused.  Well, this is the kind  of  character  that  
the lady  has.
Can't  you remember  all the men that she brought  to 
your  house  with  a masquerade  and  how  she was abusing  you?  
That  was  a big  surprise  to all and  sundry.
With  all these,  I beg  you in the name  of  your  late  mother  
and father  to  forgo  the matter  of  that  lady.
I am yours  wholly  and  completely,  
Esu-lehin-ibeji
This  was  the letter  that  Adiitu's  friend  wrote  to him  and  Adiitu  
hardly  contradicted  anything  he said. He loved  him dearly.  
Something was strange  to him,  however.  And that is that the 
week  Esu-lehin-ibeji  said that Iyunade  Was sleeping  around.
124






he visited  her house  everyday.  Although  during  that  week,  he 
was not staying  till eleven  o'clock  as he used  to do previously  
because  there  was  a very  important  job that  he was  doing.  Still,  
he would  stay  till eight  o'clock  or, at times  nine  o'clock.
On the day that the man wrote  to Adiitu,  he wrote  a 
another  one to Iyun-ade,  which  read  thus:
Opopo  Idarudapo,  
September 2,1958.
My  dear  Iyun-ade,
Look  at me. Let me tell you this,  you are the glory  of  this land  
for all of  us. We boast  about  you everywhere.  The beauty  that  
God gave you, the good character  that God gave you, the 
prosperity  that  God  gave  you,  the  good  singing voice  that  God 
gave  you.  Almighty  God  will  not  take  them  away  from  you.
Let me tell you, you have wounded  my heart  many  
times  in the past.  The wound  is so much  that  I have  applied  so 
many  curative drugs  to it but the wound  refused to heal.  No, 
there  is not a single  day that  I see you that  I will  not lose my 
appetite  when  I get  home.  You attract  me a lot, you attract  me 
so much,  you attract  me beyond  limits. In short,  I want  to 
marry  you as my wife and there  is nothing  you want  that  I 
will  not  do for you.  If it is money,  I have  it, if  it is power,  I have  
it, if it is popularity  I have  it in abundance.
However,  I would  not  have  said  this to you but  for the 
fact  that something  is on its way  that  I will  not  like to hit  you.  
Adiitu  that  is running  after  you does  not  love  you  at all.
125






The number  of  women  he is dating  is countless.  As you know,  
we work  together.  He changes  women  on a daily  basis.  The one 
that  sleeps  with  him today  will  not  sleep  with  him tomorrow.  
The worst  of it all is that he is in debt. The business  we do 
together  has been ruined  completely  and the white  man is 
coming  to shut  down  all the  firms  next  week.
Even if the white  man does not shut  the business,  his 
own days are numbered  in this world  and take note of what  
will  happen  in  five  days  from  now  at about  eight  o'clock  in the 
evening. One  of  his creditors  has vowed  that  he will  shoot  him 
down  with  a gun.
After  his death,  what will become  of people  like you 
and  the story  I have  heard  is a true one.  He will  be shot  dead  in 
front  of  the tree  in  front  of your  house.
Please  do no forget  these  words  of mine  and I want  a 
reply  by tomorrow  night.  I shall  wait  under  the orange  tree 
near  your  house  by nine  o 'clock.  Meet  me there.
I am yours  truly  till  I die,
Esu-lehin-ibeji
This  was  the type  of letter  that  the same  person  wrote  to 
these  two people.  When  Iyun-ade  read  her own  letter,  she put 
it in her handbag  and decided  to hand  it over  to Adiitu  in the 
evening.
Truly,  Adiitu  came to her in the evening  but he was 
wearing  a mournful  face and a sealed  lip. Iyun-ade  greeted  
him but he did not respond.  She asked  a question  from  him 
and  he merely  grunted.  After  some  time,  she called  him  inside
126



the room  and knelt  down,  telling  him  that  she wanted  to make  
a request and that request  is that  Adiitu  should  watch  out for 
Esu-lehin-ibeji.
On hearing  this,  Adiitu  started  uttering  very  foul  words  
to Iyun-ade  saying,  'I should  watch  out? I should  watch  out  for 
Esu-lehin-ibeji?  It is you.  It is you,  Iyun-ade  that  I should  watch  
out  for. You  this  wayward  and  worthless  person.'  Iyun-ade  did 
not say anything.  She just entered into the room,  brought  out 
her handbag  and Esu-lehin-ibeji's  letter  and handed  it over  to 
Adiitu.  She left Adiitu,  went  into the compound  and started  
preparing  food.  Adiitu  read  the letter  and  he knew  Esu-lehin-  
ibeji's  handwriting  very  well.  Adiitu  read  the letter  many  times  
over and a mixture  of shame  and surprise  overtook  him as 
nobody  had  ever  let him down  in such  a way.  Adiitu  stood  up, 
went  to the  compound  and prostrated flatly  for Iyun-ade,  his 
betrothed.  Adiitu  and Iyun-ade  kept mute  until  the night  of 
the day when he was meant  to collect  the reply  to his letter.  
Adiitu went stealthily  to the tree which Esu-lehin-ibeji  
mentioned  for collecting  the response  to his letter  and he saw 
Esu-lehin-ibeji  there  waiting  on that  spot  for Iyun-ade.
Adiitu  did not normally  act rashly  and since  it was  only  
four days away  before  his supposed  killer  would  come,  he 
suspected  very strongly  that it would  be Esu-lehin-ibeji  
himself  who would  attempt  to kill him. Before  that night,  
Adiitu  had planned  something  secretly  with the younger  
brother  of Esu-lehin-ibeji.  He said that he wanted  to do 
something  that would greatly  amuse Esu-lehin-ibeji.  He 
wanted  his brother  to wait somewhere  such that Esu-lehin-ibeji
would  think that he was the one waiting  there. He 
planned  very well with his brother  and warned  him not to 
allow  his brother  to hear about  it. He gave  his own  clothes  to
127



Esu-lehin-ibeji ’s brother  to wear  as this  event  would  take  place  
in the dark.  When  it was  night,  Esu-lehin-ibeji's  brother  came  
in Adiitu-Olodumare's  attires at exactly  the point where  
Adiitu  used  to enter  Iyun-ade's  house  every  night.  As soon  as 
Esu-lehin-ibeji,  who  was carrying  a gun,  saw  him,  he thought  
it was Adiitu.  Bang! The gun boomed  and Esu-lehin-ibeji's  
brother  died.  Esu-lehin-ibeji  did not know  who  the gun  hit as 
he ran away  immediately  after  shooting  the gun. His thought  
was that he had killed  Adiitu-Olodumare.  Only  Adiitu  and 
Iyun-ade  in the whole  of Ajedubule  knew  who  died  and who  
killed  him.  And  when  Esu-lehin-ibeji  ran away,  he did not run 
to his own house.  He headed  for a certain  town on the 
outskirts  of Ajedubule  so that the matter  of Adiitu's  death  
would  not  be traced  to him.
He came  back  in the morning  at about  eight  o'clock.  He 
was  greatly  ruffled  when  he saw  Adiitu  and  Iyun-ade  walking  
hand  in hand  and they  were  the first to console  him over  the 
death  of his brother.  Adiitu  did not release  Esu-lehin-ibeji's  
letter  as he was not yet ready  to make  a case with  him. He 
wanted  the security  service to carry out their own  
investigation  to the best of their  ability  before talking  and he 
warned  Iyun-ade  not  to breathe  a word  on the matter.
It was four whole  weeks  before  Adiitu  decided  to 
speak. The regent  of Ajedubule  town  was Adiitu's  friend  and 
he wanted  to mention  the matter  at the king's  palace.  As soon  
as he was about  to broach  the matter  at the king's  palace  by 
mentioning  Esu-lehin-ibeji's  name,  the regent  who  was going  
to greet  him signaled  to him not to mention  it because  they  
wanted  to arrest  Esu-lehin-ibeji  in the palace  as he had made  
arrangements  to come  and see one of the regent's  wives.  This
128






is a taboo  as the king must  not sight  any man, whatever  his 
status,  with  any  of the women  in the palace.  The woman  had 
informed  her  husband  and  people  had  been  placed  around  the 
house.  Soon  after, Esu-lehin-ibeji  entered  the woman's  room  
and immediately,  the regent  knocked  at the door and Esu-lehin-ibeji  
who was inside asked, 'Who is it?' The man  
responded,  'It is the husband.'  Swiftly,  Esu-lehin-ibeji  grabbed  
a big pot and hid under  it. The regent  entered  and the wife  
signaled  to the direction  of the pot.  As the pot was opened  and 
Esu-lehin-ibeji  saw the regent,  he made  to dash out and he 
pushed  the regent  to the ground  and  the regent  staggered.  The 
men  in the king's  palace  gave  him  the chase  and he climbed  to 
the roof-top  and jumped  to the top of a tree and the people  
began  to cut the tree from  below,  he dashed  from  the tree and 
plunged  into  the river  and  they  plunged  with  him.  At the end, 
they caught  up with  him and they  began  to slap him on the 
face  until  they  were  able  to arrest  him  and  lock  him  up.
But the king  of Ajedubule  was a very  tough  person,  he 
gave  Esu-lehin-ibeji  a very  painful  death;  he did not kill him 
because  he entered  into  the bedroom  of his son's  wife  where  he 
was caught.  He gave  him  a painful  death  because  of Iyun-ade  
whose  character  he so terribly  assassinated  in the letter  he 
wrote  to Adiitu.  What  if the fellow  did  not see the letter  that  he 
wrote  to the lady  also?  What  if the letter  got  lost  and  Adiitu  did 
not see it. He would  have destroyed  the lives of two people  
and the coming  generation  also because  he would have  
destroyed  Adiitu's life  and that of Iyun-ade  and their  unborn  
offspring.  The  king  declared  that,  'A person  like  this  deserves  a 
painful  death  and people  must  show  that they  reject  him and 
the Almighty  God  will  reject  him  in heaven.  'Seize  him,  pluck







out one of his eyes, pluck  it and place  it right  in front  of me 
now.' Immediately,  they plucked  out one of Esu-lehin-ibeji ’s 
eyes.  Then,  the king  commanded,  'Pluck  out the second  eye, I 
want  it urgently.'  They  also plucked  out the second.  After  that 
he said, 'Cut one of his arms until it nearly  drops,  cut the 
second  hand and let it hang  also, cut one of his legs almost  
completely  and cut the second  in a similar  manner;  do not cut 
them off completely.'  They did that and Esu-lehin-ibeji  was 
bellowing  in pains.
After  doing  all these,  the king  asked them  to bring  out 
his big lorry  used  for carrying  cocoa  and tie Esu-lehin-ibeji  to 
the tyre so that instead  of the tyre touching  the ground,  it 
would  be Esu-lehin-ibeji  that would  be touching  the ground.  
Then the king commanded  that the lorry should  be driven  
around  for about  ten miles and they should  bring  him the 
report.  He finished  his instructions  and stood  up and all the 
audience  shouted  'Kabiyesi,  second-in-command  to the Deity.'
By the time they returned,  the arms  had scattered  into 
the bush,  the legs had dropped  off into the grove  and Esu-  
lehin-ibeji  had  dropped  into  the river.
Later,  when  Adiitu-Olodumare  wedded,  he found  out 
that  Iyun-ade had never  slept  with  any  man  before  he married  
him.
Many  of the human  beings  on earth  today  ought  to die 
the kind of death  that Esu-lehin-ibeji  died  because  these  kind  
of people  have  no interest  in the progress  of their  fellow  men.  
They  exist  for destruction;  they are thorny  and stunted  trees  
among  human  beings  and many  men  have  lost priceless  gifts  
because  they  have  fallen  into the hands  of these  thorny trees.  
Look at Esu-lehin-ibeji,  an intimate  friend of Adiitu
130


Olodumare,  yet look at the damage he  had done.  He was the 
one who advised  Adiitu  Olodumare  not to marry  Iyun-ade,  
while  he himself  was striving  to marry  the same Iyun-ade.  
Anyone  who  thinks  that this is mere  fiction  and that  it cannot  
happen  in the real world  of today,  is a very stupid  person,  
whose  stupidity  is the most  boundless  in the whole  world.
There are numerous  Esu-lehin-ibeji  who make the 
greatest  contribution  to the suffering  that befall men and 
women  in courtship.  No doubt,  they  will also encounter  their  
own suffering  here on earth and they will continue  their  
suffering  in heaven.
 131






Seven

After  Adiitu-Olodumare's  Wedding  Ceremony

The wedding  of Adiitu-Olodumare  was so merry  that it was 
difficult  to describe  because  God  blessed  the man  exceedingly.  
His  wealth  could  not  be recounted  by mere  words.  And  he was 
such  an extremely  generous  man.  He spent  money  lavishly.  He 
invited  all kings with their beaded  crowns.  All important  
chiefs  lined  up one after the other  with  beads  on their  necks  
and  the rich  men  with  their  posh  cars  were  in attendance.  Poor  
people  walked  on their  feet to the occasion  and they  were  all 
well fed. They  ate and ate and ate and they drank  and drank  
and  drank.  They  also  danced  and  danced  and danced  and  they  
all rejoiced  mightily.  The town  was in great  merriment  and 
people  were  going  in and going  out. In accordance  with  the 
custom  of Ajedubule  town,  such  weddings  were  done  in two 
phases.  The first  phase  is for the celebrants  to celebrate  as we 
have  narrated  above;  the second  phase  is for him to entertain  
the people  in the home  of Enudunjuyo  (tongue  is sweeter  than  
salt).
The home of Enudunjuyo  is for storytelling  and 
anybody  preparing  for this kind  of event  must go and see the 
Mogaji  (District  head)  of Enudunjuyo  ward  so that he would  
advertise  the event  all over  the town  and  paste  the information
132



in all public  places.  But he must  give  the Mogaji  a large  sum  of 
money.  There  is hardly  any  other  business  in the Enudunjuyo  
ward  than  to tell stories  and collect  money  in the process.  Their  
tongue  is sugar-coated  and  there  was  no tale  under  the sun  that 
they  could  not  tell.
Once  Adiitu  had paid  Mogaji  his fees, invitations  were  
pasted  in all public  places.
LET THE  MOUSE  HEAR  AND  TELL  IT TO THE BIRD,  LET 
MEN  HEAR  AND TELL  IT TO WOMEN,  LET CHILDREN  
HEAR AND TELL IT TO ELDERS  THAT ADIITU-  
OLODUMARE  HAS  MARRIED  IYUN-ADE  AS HIS  WIFE.  HE 
HAS  SPENT  MONEY  FOR  ALL  PEOPLE  AND  HE HAS  PAID  
THE  MOGAJI  OF ENUDUNJUYO'S  WARD.  STORYTELLING  
WILL  COMMENCE  AT NINE  O'CLOCK  IN THE MORNING  
OF 11TH  SEPTEMBER,  1958.  ALL  ARE  CORDIALLY  INVITED
- THE  MOGAJI OF ENUDUNJUYO'S  WARD
This  notice  was pasted  in all public  places.  On that  day, 
all feet gathered  in Enudunjuyo's  home  and the place was 
over-crowded;  some  sat on chairs,  others  stood  and thousands  
of people  sat on mats  that  were  spread  all over  the place.  When  
everybody  was seated,  the Mogaji  came  out. Adiitu  and his 
wife  sat on special  chairs  in full  wedding  regalia.
The  Mogaji  of the house  at that  time  was a very  old man  
and  he was  indeed  bald-headed  and  the centre  of the head  was 
shining  like the a pot  of soup.
He started  speaking  thus:
133






People of Ajedubule,  I greet you. All visitors  to 
Ajedubule,  I greet you; I greet citizens  and I greet  
strangers;  I greet  wizards  and I greet  witches;  I greet  
medicine  men,  I greet  magicians,  I greet  the rich  and  the 
poor; I greet the well-fed  and the hungry.  All you 
Christians,  I greet  you; all Moslems  I greet  you; all  you 
worshippers  of Orisa  Deity  I greet  you.  Look  at this  side.  
(He pointed  at Adiitu  and Iyunade)  Adiitu-Olodumare  
marries  Iyun-ade;  do they  fit each  other  or do they  not?'  
Everybody  answered  and  said.  They  fit each  other.'
He asked  them  for the second  and the third  time and 
they  answered  accordingly.  After  that,  he proceeded  with  his 
speech:
Before  I continue  with  my speech,  I want  to remind  
you  that,  in accordance  with  the practice  of this town,  in 
seven  days time from today,  Adiitu  and his wife will 
come  here  to show  appreciation  to the people  of heaven  
and the people  of this earth  and I want  you to all come  
here  on that day as you  have  done  today,  to rejoice  with  
husband  and wife  on the journey  of a new  life that  they  
have  embarked  upon.
In all the things  of this  world,  there  is none  as certain  
as the fruit of one's labour.  Anybody  doing evil is 
simply  stupid  because, if he was wise,  he would  know  
that he would  reap his evil ways. But if anybody  is 
doing  good  and people  are insulting  him, let him not 
pay  heed  as good  will  clearly  come  to him.
The story  I am about  to tell will further  drive  home  
the meaning  of the statement  I have  just made  to you.
 134




There  was once a king in the olden  days known  as 
Okonko-loju-abe.  To say that  a king  is wealthy,  popular,  
prosperous  and powerful  and to say that a king has 
numerous  children.  King  Alaiyeluwa  Okonko  had no 
equal.  He had so many  children  that his children  did 
not  know  one another  and  began  to inter-marry.  He had 
so many  houses  that  he even  bought  all the houses  in a 
certain  town.  One thousand  and one hundred  towns  
pay tribute  to him  on a yearly  basis.  As he was wealthy  
and as he ruled over many villages,  so was he 
prosperous.  As numerous  as his wives  were,  no man  
dared  cross  their  paths and any  man  who  crossed  their  
paths  would  be killed  instantly.
No matter  how  numerous  a man's  wives  are, he will 
certainly  have  a favourite.  Okonko  had a favourite  and 
it was one of his newly  married  wives  called  Esan-mbo.  
He loved  the woman  so much  that he did not hide  his 
love for her from  anyone.  This attitude  did not please  
the other  wives,  especially  the most  senior  wife.
One  day, the king  traveled  and the most  senior  wife  
got so desperate  for what  to do and she went  to prepare  
a medicine  which  would  not kill anyone  but would  
send the person  asleep  instantly  and it would  take a 
long  time  for the person  to come  round.
That  was how she was able to trap Esan-mbo,  the 
king ’s favourite  wife.  As the head  wife,  all other  wives  
gave  her  the respect  due  to her and she was  the one they  
referred  to as mother.  She found  Esan-mbo  and some  
other  wives  playing  and she called  on her, saying,  'My 
own Esan-mbo,  I want to see you, leave-all  these
135







irresponsible  ones  and  let's  take  a stroll,  you  and I'.  That  
was how Esan-mbo  followed  her and they went  from  
house  to house,  compound  to compound  and from  
street  to street  until  they  arrived  at the house  of a certain  
elderly  woman.  As soon  as they got there,  the woman  
asked  her, 'What  will you eat Esan?' Esan answered,  
'My mother,  I am full.' The woman  replied,  'Too full to 
even  taste soup? Esan answered  again,  'Don't  bother,  
my mother.'  She did not bother  to ask her anymore  
before  she went  into the room  and brought  some  soup  
and  handed  it over  to Esan-mbo,  saying,  'Taste  this one, 
it is not  much,  it can't  fill you  up. ' There  was  no avoiding  
it and  she  had  hardly  licked  the soup  that  she fell asleep.
Immediately,  the senior wife called out all the 
servants  in the palace  whom  she had bribed and asked  
them  to tie Esan-mbo  up with  clothes  and mats  and put 
her inside  a box which  was already  made  for her and 
which  was  big enough  to contain  her. She told  them  that 
as soon as it became  dark  they should  take her to the 
outskirt  of the town  where  there  was a cemetery.  The 
cemetery  was  meant  for the messengers  of the king  and 
it was  made  like a house  where  a hole  was dug and  was 
sealed  with concrete,  cement  and a door. The graves  
there  were so many  and the cemetery  was as big as a 
town  because,  cynicism  apart,  the king  Okonko  was a 
very  mighty  king  with  as many  servants  as there  were  
numerous  wives.
Yet, it was only the king's  servants  that should  be 
buried  at the outskirt  of the town  and all wives  were  
buried  in the palace  but they too were buried  inside
 136




graves  with doors  such that anybody  could  enter  the 
grave  anytime  they  wished  to.
In no time,  the woman  had  commissioned  craftsmen  
to carve,  the statue  of a woman. Then  she began  to bribe  
everybody  involved  so that  none  of them  would  tell on 
her. The  money  distributed  was  not small  at all. She  also 
distributed  gifts  such  as clothes,  head-gears  and  several  
gifts.  That  was  how  she deployed  money  to cover  up her 
wrongdoing  and used  material  gifts to gloss  over  evil 
but God Almighty  remained  silent  knowing  what  he 
would  do eventually.
Those  she had  bribed  had  prepared  the grave  for the 
carved  statue  and dressed up the wooden  object  like a 
corpse  awaiting  the arrival  of the king.  So what  would  
happen  to Esan-mbo  that had been sealed  up in the 
grave alive? This was what happened.  A certain  
businessman  came  into the town  to sell things  and his 
name  was  Alabapade.  He was a well-to-do  man  and he 
came  with  a lot of goods.  In the evening  time,  he took  a 
long  stroll  into the town.  His feet led him to this huge  
cemetery  and  he walked  around  the place  and  as he was 
thinking  of his numerous articles  for sale, night  caught  
up with  him  and  the moon  shone.
Shortly,  he saw  four  men  who  brought  a long  box to 
the place  and dropped  it in one hole  and left thereafter.  
As soon as they left, this man  went  to where  the four 
men  deposited  the box they  had brought. When  he got 
there,  he found  that the box was sealed  up with  nails  
and so he went  back  to where  he resided.  When  he got 
there,  he took  the instrument  for removing  nails  and  he







went  back  and  began  to remove  those  nails.  What  did he 
find in the box? He found  a woman  whose  beauty  was 
difficult  to describe  and who  was struggling  to breathe  
and  almost  at the point  of death.
He started  to revive  the woman,  farming  her for a 
long time until she regained  consciousness.  The man  
ran back to his lodging  and came  back to the woman  
with:  some  food  and the woman  ate and also drank  the 
water  he brought  for her  until  she regained  her strength.  
It was then that Alabapade  asked  her where  she lived  
and  where  she wanted  to be taken  to. This  was the brief  
reply  that the woman  gave him: 'You are my saviour,  
take  me to wherever  you  live  in this town.'
That  was how the businessman  took the woman  to 
where  he lodged.  Fortunately,  the guest  house  where  
the man  lodged  was at the outskirt  of the town  and the 
head  wife  was  not  known  to anybody.
The man's  room  was a single  room  with  two beds.  
He slept  on one  while  the queen  slept  on the other  till the 
next morning.  Everything  was like a mystery  to the 
queen.  She  knew  that  she lived  in the palace  and  she  also 
knew  that Alabapade  found  her in the cemetery.  She 
however  did not recollect  how  she got there  and  neither  
did Alabapade.  Esan-mbo  did not know who  
Alabapade  was. All she knew was that he was a 
comfortable  man  because  the hotel  he stayed  in was as 
good  as the palace  itself  and  the bed she slept  on did not 
fall below  the standard  of the one she slept on in the 
palace.
 138



When day broke the next morning,  they ate 
breakfast.  It was after they had eaten  that Alabapade  
started  to tell Esan-mbo  the story  of his own  life; how  he 
was  a prosperous  businessman  who  was  coming  to that 
town  for the first  time  when  he came  across  Esan-mbo.  
He narrated  every  detail  of his story  with  the hope  that 
Esan-mbo  would  also  narrate  her own  story.  But  she did 
not do so at all. What  she finally  told Alabapade  was 
that she could not tell him much  about  herself  but 
would  prefer  that  they  continued  to live together  for the 
time  being.
That  was how  they  carried  on, eating  together  and 
drinking together  but sleeping  separately  every night.  
When  Alabapade  went  out,  he would  quickly  return  so 
that his visitor  would  not feel lonely.  On a certain  day 
when  Alabapade  was a little  late in coming  back,  it was 
these words  of passion  that Alabapade  met in Esan-mbo's  mouth:
'My  friend,  why  did you come  back  so late?  I doubt  
if you  know  what  you  mean  to me. Look  at me, you  are a 
saviour  and confidant  to me. You are a cool spring  
gushing  forth  from  the rocks.  A man  had walked  in the 
grove  for three  whole  days,  without  water,  beaten  by 
the sun in the morning,  afternoon  and evening,  and 
with  patched  throat.  The  man  suddenly  found  a spring,  
ran  up to it, fetched  some  water  and  drank  it such  that  it 
soothed  his throat  and he felt a lot better.  His lungs,  
liver, heart, kidneys  and nerves  that were hot now  
became  cool and his whole  body quickened.  That is 
what you mean  to me, Alabapade,  whom  Almighty  
God  has sent  to me.'
139



That was what  the woman  said, but there  was no 
revelation  for Alabapade  in what  she had said. There  
was  no other  meaning  other  than  she had  taken  him  as a 
very  important  person  in her life. She did not reveal  her 
identity,  be it a slave or a free-born,  a princess  or a 
person  of lowly  birth;  he had  no clue  to her identity.
For a while,  Alabapade  did not  bother  any  more  and 
they carried  on with their relationship.  However,  no 
matter  how secretive  a woman  can be, if she loves a 
man,  that man will eventually  know.  The same  is true 
for a man. When  a man is in love with a woman,  the 
woman  will  get to know  in no time  at all. Thus,  the two 
people  started  sensing  their  mutual  love  for each  other.  
But a man's  patience  is short-lived,  were a man to be 
long-suffering,  women  will make  love proposition  to 
men.  Suddenly,  one night, Alabapade left  his own  bed 
and went  to meet  Esan-mbo  in hers, woke  her up and 
ask her to move  close to the wall as he wished  to sleep  
next  to her. Esan-mbo  then  lit the lamp,  removed  one of 
her clothes  and showed  something  to Alabapade.  She 
showed  him her underclothes  and asked  him to read  
what  was  written  on the side  of the cloth.  This  was  what,  
had been  sewn  to one comer  of the dress:  I CANNO'T  
SHARE  TOU  WITH  ANYBODY  ON EARTH.  I OWN  
YOU  TILL  DEATH.
- KING  OKONKO
When Alabapade  read those words,  his nerves  
calmed  down,  'So you are a Queen?'  She answered,  
'And  the king's  favourite  too. Whoever  I asked  the king
 140 



to send away  must go, whoever  I asked  to be killed  
must  die. The king  never  dished  out a small  ration  of 
pounded  yam  to me.'
Alabapade  asked  again,  'How  then  did you end  up 
in a coffin  in a cemetery?'  She answered  and said, 'I do 
not remember  much  about  that  but  I remember  that  the 
most  senior  Queen  was the one who gave me soup  to 
lick but I cannot  remember  how I got inside  a coffin.'  
Alabapade  further  asked  her, ' Did this your senior  
Queen  love you?' She answered'  'On face value,  she 
seemed  to love  me, but it is only  the Almighty  God  that 
knows  who  loves  one from  the heart.  And  listen,  even  if 
she did not love me whole-heartedly,  can she go 
unpunished?  No, never, as my name indicates,  
vengeance  is on the way. Vengeance  will catch  up with  
her.' And  when  Alabapade  asked  again,  'So what  shall  
we do now, would  you find a way of returning  to the 
palace?'  Esan  shouted  loudly  and said,  'Go to where  or 
what  did you say? If the king sets his eyes on me, the 
punishment  he would  mete out to me will be worse  
than  death,  but in your  own  case,  there  is no doubt  that 
he will  kill you  instantly  for merely  seeing  me with  you 
and it will be  a very painful  death.  When  we Queens  
visit the market,  the market  disperses  in great  hurry.  
Any man that did not run would  be beheaded!  Not 
King  Okonko;  the king  that  is tough  that  he could  not  be 
appeased;,  more  lethal  than poison!  This is how it will 
work  out. Let us continue  to live together  as we have  
been  doing.  The people  in this area do not know  me at 
all and when  you have  sold all your  wares,  let us find
141







somewhere  else to go. That  was  how  the matter  ended  
and Alabapade  gathered his loin clothes  and retreated  
to his own  bed.
From  that moment,  both of them  knew  what  they  
meant  to each  other.  They  ate and drank  together  and in 
fact, their  love grew  stronger  for each other.  Once,  the 
devil  stepped  in and Esan-mbo  suddenly  left her bed  in 
the middle  of the night and went to sleep with  
Alabapade.  But when  he woke up and saw her, he 
quietly  got  up and  went  to sit on the chair.
Now  let us see what  happened  at the palace.  Omo-  
owu,  the most  senior wife who locked  Esan  inside  the 
box thought  that she had died because  when the 
messengers  left the palace  to go and  inspect  the box and 
did  not  find  it there,  they  did  not report  back  to her.
She then went to the cemetery  in the palace  and 
wrapped  up the carved  figure  in numerous  clothes  and 
put it in the tomb.  She wrapped  this wooden  object  and 
cemented  the walls of the tomb very well. She then  
painted  it in many  colours  awaiting  the arrival  of the 
king.  As we said earlier,  the tradition  is to dig a large  
hole and hang  a door  on its roof and put the corpse  of 
any dead  Queen  in it such  that anybody  could  see the 
dead  person  at any time  the door  was opened.  That  was 
what  Omo-owu  did and then  wrote  an epitaph  on the 
tomb that read thus: Here lies a kind person,  Esan-  
mbo;  a Queen  that was greater  than Queens,  a gentle  
person,  a humble  person,  a wise person,  a 
knowledgeable  person.  You are a flower  with sweet  
fragrance  among  human  beings.  You sun dimmed
142



suddenly  on a bright  noon!  Goodbye,  expect  me as I 
will soon  come  to join  you because  the world  can no 
longer  be enjoyable  for me since  you  have  left  me. Till 
then, my friend,  my beloved  and my dearest  one 
forever.  Written  by Omo-owu,  head  of the Queens.
There  was something  though;  this woman,  Omo-owu, 
had one attribute.  She could cry effortlessly  
whether  she was sad or happy.  Anytime  she chose  to 
cry, she cried  on and  tears  poured  freely  on her cheeks.
When the king returned  from his journey,  she 
greeted him with  tears  and it was as she cried  that the 
king began to suspect  that something  terrible  had 
happened  while  he was away  and  when  he heard  what  
had happened,  the king  himself  burst  into a terrifying  
cry in public.  His voice  roared  like thunder  from  the sky 
bellowing  in the presence  of the whole  world  and that 
was  a taboo  for a king.
When  he calmed  down  and went  to the tomb  that  he 
thought  his wife  was  in, he thanked  Omo-owu,  his most  
senior  wife profusely  for giving  his favourite  wife a 
befitting  burial. He now commanded  that his own  
epitaph  be placed  on the tomb. This was what was 
written  on it:
A! Esan-mbo,  Esan-mbo,  Esan-mbo.
Which woman  compares  with you on this
earth?
Which  woman  can take care of her husband
like  you?  Esan-mbo!
Which  woman  can give good  counsel  like you?
Esan-mbo!
143





Which  woman  can provide  delicious  meals  like 
you? Esan-mbo!
Which  woman  can nurture  a husband  like you?  
Esan-mbo!
Which  woman  is as dependable  as you? Esan-  
mbo!
Which  woman  is as dependable  on money  
matters? Esan-mbo!
Which  woman  is as dependable  on children  
matters?  Esan-mbo!
Which  woman  is as dependable  to take care of 
the home?
Esan-mbo!
To take  care  of relations?
Esan-mbo!
To take  charge  of health  matters?
Esan-mbo!
None  compares  with  you  among  women.
And you acted  this way, departing  before  my 
arrival?
Leaving  the world  for me?
You have covered  yourself  with earth like 
clothes?
However,  those  of you who have died,  if you take a 
look  at the world,  please  do not forget  the world,  do 
not forget  the world,  do not forget  the world.  And  do 
get ready for me as I shall come to join you 
immediately  because  you have  been  a special  wife  to 
me on earth.  You will certainly  be one in heaven,  my 
own dear Esan-mbo,  my very important  Esan-mbo,



my truthful  Esan-mbo,  my unique  Esan-mbo,  my own 
Esan-mbo.  The day is coming  when  we shall  set eyes 
on each  other.
This epitaph  is set down  by a truthful  husband  to 
Esan-mbo,  from her husband,  Alaiyeluwa,  King  
pkonku.
This was  the tomb  inscription  that  the king  wrote  for
the woman.  You could  see what  this woman  meant  to 
the king.
But it is what is on Oba Okonko's  mind that we 
should  examine  as it may carry  important  lessons  for 
us. Esan-mbo  bore children  for king Okonko  but the 
position  he gave  her differed  from  the one he provided  
for the other  queens.  If she asked  Okonko  to kill, he 
killed;  if she asked  him  to punish  someone,  he punished  
the  person.  But  Esan  never  behaved  wickedly  to anyone  
as she loved  other  people's  children  just  as she loved  her 
own children.  What  is most  pleasing  in the woman's  
character  was that she did not possess  the evil ways  of 
women  who discredit  a father  before his children.  The 
mother  of one of my friends  insulted  his father  until  he 
died  and  even  after  his death,  she kept  on insulting  him.  
My friend  had to make  his mother  understand  that it 
was  high  time  she desisted  from  insulting  his father  and 
that  both  of them  had  enjoyed  the benefit  of his heritage  
and if she continued  to insult  his father,  she would  no 
longer  have  access  to him  as a son. This  is the attitude  of 
many  a woman  and  the absence  of this kind  of character  
was what made Esan-mbo's  death so painful  to her 
husband.  Since  he learnt  of the death  of his wife, the 
king  decided  to weep for  her every  five days  and King
145



Okonko's  cry rocked  the palace  whenever  he did.
That  was  how  the king  carried  on for six months  not 
knowing  that Esan-mbo  did not die. One day, this king  
gently  laid his back on his bed, closed  his eyes and 
pretended  to be sleeping.  He did not sleep  at all, he just 
wanted  to eavesdrop.  It was Esan-mbo  who used to 
counsel  him and who relayed  to him the goings-on  in 
public  life and since  her death,  he had heard  nothing.  
That  was why  he developed  the new  habit  acting  as if 
he was  sleeping  when  he was  not sleeping.
It was  in this mode  that  he was in when  two women  
working  in the palace began  to speak.  One started  by 
saying,  'My friend,  men are so stupid,  so very stupid.'
The  second  woman  responded,  'Why  did you say that?'  
That  former  responded  and said, 'Is this not apparent  
by the attitude of that one who calls  himself  the King?  
Look,  for six months.  six whole  months,  he had been  
weeping  for the statue  he calls his wife!' The other  
woman  replied,  'Listen,  does it mean  that he has not 
discovered  the truth  up till now;  that it was  a carving  
that his senior  wife wrapped  up and called  Esan-mbo  
for him!'  Her  friend  responded  saying,  'Know  my foot!  
Do you know  that his senior  wife had charmed  him?  
Was yesterday  not the week  of Ifa? If you heard  him 
roar  like a monkey  in the  bush,  you would  be amazed.'  
Both of them mutually  agreed,  'It is a spell!  His oldest  
wife has cast a spell on  him because  if I were in his 
position  I would  demand  to see the face of the dead  
wife;  I would  say so, if I were  in his shoes.'
That  was  how  they  spoke  directly  to the hearing of 
the king.  They  concluded  their  discussion  thus, 'Where
 146



indeed  is Esan-mbo?  Did she or did she not die inside  
the box that she was locked  up in?' And the second  
woman  then  answered,  'Died!  She did not die at all, she 
had remarried.  The name of the new husband  is 
Alabapade.  You know  that big story building  at the 
edge  of the town  from  where  elukiu  usually  emerges?  
That is where  Esan-mbo  now lives. They say she has 
grown  even  more  robust,  rotund  and  fresh  in build.'
The king handled  the matter  very carefully.  He 
allowed  the two  women  to leave  first  before  calling  on 
his eldest  wife.  He sent  her on an errand  which  would  
take  her  out of the palace  for a minimum  of three  hours.  
The  king  summoned  seven  hefty  men  among  his palace,  
wards.  One  of them  was sent  to the farm  to fetch  strong  
whips  and the rest six were instructed  to bring out 
Esan-mbo's  corpse  from the tomb and unwrap  the 
clothes  on her  body.  When  they  finished  derobbing  her, 
truly,  it was  a carved  object  that  they  found.
The king  ordered  that  the statue  be put in his room.  
He sat down waiting  for the arrival  of his eldest  wife,  
Omo-owu.  When  she came,  she delivered  the message  
from  her errand,  'Kabiyesi,  the chiefs  have asked  to see 
you  in four  days'  time,  on Ifa Day  and  I have  asked  them  
not to because,  since you were bereaved  due to the 
death  of Esan-mbo,  you  have  remained  unhappy  on Ifa 
Days,  huu, huu, huu.' She burst  out crying  and tears  
were  flowing  freely  from  her eyes.  The king asked  her 
to be taken  away.  Meanwhile,  the statue  of Esan-mbo  
remained  in the king's  room.
They  took  her away  and as soon  as she thought  the 
king  was not looking,  she laughed,  and  the king  heard.
147






The  king  sent  for her.  As she arrived,  she said,  'Kabiyesi,
I am told you are calling  me.' The king went  into the 
room and asked her to follow him, that he had 
something  to tell her. As she entered  the room  and 
looked  ahead,  she saw the carving  of Esan-mbo.  The 
king  burst  into a funny  laughter  and  said,  'I see that  you 
have finished  shedding  false tears and it is time you 
cried  for real.'  Then  he started  to thrash  her. Wai, Wai, 
wai, the lashes landed  on the stupid  woman. She
shouted,  'Please,  Kabiyesi,  kabiyesi,  please my, king,  
have  mercy,  I said have  mercy,  pity me, forgive me for 
the sake of my mother.'  The king  ignored  her plea  and 
the worst  of all is that when  a king thrashes  you, you 
dare not hold the cane. The king had closed  the door  
without  bolting  it but  no one dared  enter,  out of fear.  All 
the time  she was shouting,  'Alaye,  owner of the wodd,  
owner  of the world,  you want  to kill me? Please  don't  
kill me,'nobody  entered.
After  a while  she herself  found  a way  of opening  the 
door  and ran out but the king  ran after  her. She dashed  
into one room and the king dashed  after her, she 
jumped  through  a window and the king  followed  suit.  
She later ran into a spot in the palace  where  big pots  
were  turned  upside  down,  she opened  one of them  and 
covered  her head  with  it and the king  entered  the place.  
He then suspected  that she was inside  one of the pots 
and he asked  for a carpenter's  drill and they gave  it to 
him  and  he started  to drill  all the pots.  When  the drill  hit 
the pot covering  Omo-owu  and the pot broke  up, her 
head  stock  out clearly.  Okonko  slapped  her face from



right  and left. The head  wife  started  roaring  like a lion.  
'Save  me, save  me from  Alaiye,  please  save  me, save  me 
e e e e, please  save  me.' Nobody  came  to her rescue  and 
she ran out of the palace  completely.  The king showed  
her hell and by the time she had run out of the palace,  
the king  himself  was  struggling  to catch  his breath.
The next  matter  to be handled  is that of Esan-mbo.  
The king  had heard  that she was living  with another  
man.  The  first  thing  he did was  to send  two messengers  
to go and find out if it was true that Esan-mbo  was 
living  in the place  they said she was living  and if that 
was so, they  should  then  let him  know  so that  he would  
send  those  who  would  go and bring  the man's  head  to 
him. The messengers  went  but they could  not betray  
Esan-mbo  who had catered  for them,  nurtured  them  
and  showed  them  kindness  in the past.
What  really  annoyed  the king,  which  he could  not 
share with anybody  was that Omo-owu  who chased  
Esan-mbo  out had  no element  of physical  beauty  in her 
body. She was an inheritance  from the former  king  
whom  he had met in the palace.  The woman  had no 
feminine  attributes  of any sort;  she was as brusque  as a 
man,  tall and a little fat, rough-hued,  with  a bent  nose  
and crude  cheek  bones;  her back  was rough.  She had 
bulged eyes, flappy ears, long neck and a 
disproportionately  small  head  with  a flat forehead  and 
an awkward  and thick  face. Her legs were thick and 
studded.  She did not have the mellifluous  voice of a 
woman.  She ate shabbily  in the manner of dogs.  When  
she slept,  her snoring  was like a burst  of cloud-traps  
and when she laughed  the whole  palace  would  be







overtaken  by her bellowing  laugh.  That  was  the kind  of 
woman  that  drove  away  a wife  that  was  both  physically  
beautiful  and  of good  character.
When  the messengers  found  Esan-mbo,  they  leaked  
the king's  plans  to her.  Alabapade  went  out at that  point  
and in spite of her plea that they waited  for him to 
return  so that he could  escape  in their presence,  they  
could  not  wait  lest  the king  became  suspicious.
As soon as they left, she went out to look for 
Alabapade.  She found  him in the middle  of the market  
place  where  he was haggling  and she dragged  him by 
the hand,  asking  him  to follow  her. As soon  as they  got 
to a comer  she entreated  him  thus,  'My  Pade,  hasten  fast 
so that  death  does  not catch  up with  you,  run away  fast 
as the king  has sent after  you.'  Alabapade  said, 'He has 
heard?'  'Yes, he had heard,  somebody  had told him.'  
Fade  said again,  'What  about you?'  She answered  and 
said,  'Mine  is a small  matter.  Women  always  know  what  
a man  can do; I know  for sure  that  he cannot  kill me. He 
will punish  me but if he can set his eyes on you,  he will 
make  sure  you die a painful  death.  Run,  run away  fast. 
He asked,  'Where  should  I run to?' She replied,  'Run  to 
just  anywhere.'
They  soon  got home  and she packed  a few  things  for 
Alabapade,  put fifty pounds  in his pocket,  led him out 
and as soon as they got out, they found  numerous  
people  heading  towards  them with machetes,  guns,  
clubs, cudgels,  coming  to raze the house that they  
stayed  in. The  king  had  instructed  that  they  should  raze 
the house  completely  to the ground,  tie up Esan-mbo
150


and  bring  her to him and  tie Alabapade  up to one of his 
horses,  which  should  not be ridden  but dragged  round  
the whole  town  until he died and then he should  be 
brought  to him  in that  sorry  state.
Alabapade  walked past the advancing  party  
because  they did not recognize  him but they entered  
and took Esan-mbo,  tied her hands  behind  her back  as 
the king  had instructed.  They  could  not find Pade  but 
they destroyed  the house completely,  killed all the 
animals  and  nothing  in the house  was  spared.
When  they  got to the palace  without  Alabapade,  the 
king was greatly  angered  but it was a vain anger  
without  remedy.  After he had rained  a barrage  of 
insults  on Esan-mbo,  he ordered  that  she  be taken  into  a 
dark  room  with  a single  window of the size of a small  
gourd.  That  was where  she was condemned  to live - a 
room  where  she could  only see the food that she was 
given to eat and nothing  more. The king forbade  
anybody  to provide  illumination  for the room  both  day 
and night,  forever.  That  was the situation  that the king  
placed  his wife — in his wife  that  was  as beautiful  as the 
fish in the water.  His most truthful  wife had turned  
tears  into  her daily  bread.
The king was in the habit of walking  round  the 
palace  in the dead  of night  after  everybody  had gone  to 
sleep and when  no one could  see him. On a certain  
night, when he got behind  Esan-mbo's  room, he 
suddenly  heard  her speaking  to herself  alone,  saying,  
'God,  I thought  they  said that  you are a God  of reward?  
What  reward  will you give  this my Alabapade?  A man







who lived with me for six whole months  without  
sharing  my bed; who  had no secret  plans  with  me that 
nobody  must  hear  about!  Without  doing  anything  evil, 
he was sent out of town.  Without  any iota of doubt.  
Pade will be well rewarded  for his good deeds in 
heaven  and Okonko  will reap  his own  reward  also,  but 
what  happens  while  they are still on this side of life? 
My God, what  happens  before  they depart  from this 
world,  my creator?  Through  which  means  will  I be able 
to return  the kindness  of Alabapade  to me. Almighty  
God, I live my destiny  in your  hands,  God in heaven,  
my  fate  is in your  hand.'  And  so on.
All those  words  went  into the attentive  ears of the 
king. Esan-mbo  was not aware that anybody  was 
listening  to her. She was  just speaking  her mind.  In the 
morning  of the second  day,  the king  sent  for Esan-mbo.  
By the time she was brought  out, her skin had turned  
white  like the flesh  of a sick  person  as she never  left the 
room.  That was where  she ate and drank  and if she 
wanted  to obey  the call of nature,  they took a bowl  to 
her to perform  that function  and they took the bowl  
away  after.  When  the king saw her, he was moved  to 
pity  and  he asked  her, 'Does  that  mean  that  you  and  that 
man did not sleep together  throughout?'  Esan-mbo  
replied  him, 'Who  told you that?'  He answered  her, 'I 
heard  it.' Esan-mbo  asked  again,  'I said,  how  did you 
get to know  that?'  The king  also answered,  'I just  heard  
it.'
Esan-mbo  then  lifted  up her eyes  and said,  'You,  my 
God, my destiny  is in your  hands.  You know  that this
 152



man never  slept on my bed and you know  what he 
always  said  to me all the time: You belong  to an important  
person  and we must  give due respect  to an important  man.  
This  man,  without  any offence, was driven  out. My fate 
is in your  hand,'  and she burst  into tears.  Tears  began  to 
drop  from  the king's  eyes  also.  And  this is what  he said.  
'Esan-mbo,  I permit  you  to depart  from  this palace  to go 
and  look  for that  Alabapade.  If you  find  him,  I want  you 
to marry  him  and  make  him  your  husband  but  you  must  
bring him to greet me in this palace  so that I can 
celebrate  your  wedding  with  you. Enter  and bring  my 
box of clothes  and give them to Esan-mbo,  give her 
sufficient  money  to cover  the expenses  for her journey.  
Esan-mbo,  go, take your bath, adorn  your face, your  
hands  and  legs;  turn  out as the bride  of a very  important  
person,  eat well, go with four messengers  and four  
maidservants  and  seek  after  this  man.
What the king said was pleasing  to Esan-mbo  
beyond  words.  In the first place, he did not say he 
wanted  to take  her back  as his wife  as he released  her to 
go and  marry  whoever  she wanted  to marry.  Alabapade  
had since  stayed  on her mind  and the reason  they  could  
not marry  each  other  was  because  of her marriage  to the 
king.
The problem  now was how  to find Alabapade.  The 
money  given  to her for the search  was  not less than  two 
thousand  pounds  with a lot of servants  to accompany  
her  in the search.  They  searched  for him  for a whole  year  
without  success.  All those from whom  they inquired  
gave  them  a description  of one who had died.  The last
 153



person  they  contacted  made  matters  worse  as he asked  
so many  leading  questions  that showed  that he knew  
him.  He was even  the first  person  to mention  his name,
'Is it not the person  called  Alabapade?  When  they  told 
him  it was,  he said  that  he was  sorry  to tell them  that  he 
had  died.  Esan-mbo  burst  into  tears.
They  then  turned  back  and  headed  home.  The  place  
where  they found  out about  Alabapade ’s death  was 
very  far away.  It was a five-day  walking  distance  from  
King  Okonko's  town.  On the  third  day of their  retum-  
joumey,  they  begged  for a house  where  they  could  sleep  
as there  was  no guest  house  in the town.  At about  eight  
o'clock  in the night,  there  was a loud  hue and cry in the 
house  that somebody  had lost consciousness  in the 
house.  Everybody  rushed  to the place.  Esan-mbo  also 
went there. When  they got to the compound,  they  
found  a man  whom  everybody  was  shaking  and calling  
his name,  'Fade,  Fade,  Fade.'  Nobody  knew  who this 
Fade  was  because  he had grown  thin  and scaly  from  an 
illness  that  afflicted  him.  When  Esan-mbo  peeped  to see 
the person, she  ran  back.  As the landlord  was  narratmg  
the story  of the man's  sickness,  he mentioned  his name  
as 'Alabapade' and  talked  about the  last word  that was 
on his lip before  he fainted  as 'Esan-mbo' .
They  kept calling him until  he woke  up and Esan-mbo
then  went  to look at the man again.  Truly,  it was 
Alabapade.  She then  called  him.  'Alabapade!'  The  word  
rang in the inner  ears of Alabapade  and he looked  up 
and saw that it was Esan-mbo.  'It is me; Esan-mbo.  
Speedily,  Alabapade  staggered  up. His feet were  light
 154




on the ground.  He lifted  his fleshless  arms  and  put  them  
around  Esan-mbo's  neck  and they  both  began  to shed  
tears.

Immediately,  Esan-mbo  went  to look for specialist  
doctors.  Within  a week,  Alabapade  regained  his health  
and in two weeks  his body  had returned  to its normal  
position.  It was a great  surprise  to him  when  Esan  told 
him  that  he had  to go and  see King  Okonko.
Not  to prolong  the matter,  Oba  Okonko  gave  them  a 
lot of money  and Alabapade  returned  to his business  
and the money  started  increasing  to the extent  that,  
soon,  the king's  wealth  was only a little greater  than  
their  own.
You can all now  see that, as I said at the beginning,  
everything  has its reward.  The way Alabapade  
conducted  himself  with  regard  to the king's  wife  made  
it possible  for him to marry  the woman  eventually  and 
it was the woman  that brought  prosperity  back  to his 
life.
 155 






Eight
Day Two in Mogaji  Enudunjuyo's  House

After  Mogaji  Enudunjuyo  had finished  this story,  everybody  
departed  to their  various  homes  in the hope  of returning  there  
the second  day. Early  the next  morning,  the house  was packed  
full with people  who want to hear more marvelous  stories  
from  the mouth  of the man.  He did not come  on time  as he did 
not appear  to the public  until  ten thirty  prompt.  On that  day, 
the man  wore  a long, red attire  that flowed  down  to his toes 
and he tied a white  ribbon  on his head,  with  a pair of beaded  
sandals  decorated  in the front  with  the hide  of an animal  that 
resembled  a tiger,  but  it was  really  not  the hide  of the tiger.
After  the man  had  sat down,  he began  to talk:
I greet you all, people  of Ajedubule  here seated.  
Yesterday  I spoke to you about the inevitability  of 
reward  for everybody  on earth. Those with good  
character  will reap goodness  and those with evil 
character  will be rewarded  with evil. Nobody  plants  
banana  and  reaps  oranges  instead  of banana  nor would  
anyone  plant  sweet  potato  and reap sprout.  Whatever  
one  plants  is what  he will  reap  even  if the world  changes  
and becomes  heaven.  That is the lesson  I want  you to
155



hold  on to firmly  from  the story  I told  you  yesterday.
Today I wish to recall before you the special  
privilege  that God Almighty  endows  man with and I 
want  to show  you  how  so great  this  endowment  is that  it 
has become  difficult  for man to utilize it. This  
endowment  is the power  of thought  which  man has 
above  all other creatures.  Think  of the animal  in the 
forest  which  we know  as the antelope.  If an antelope  
finds  the fruit  that he loves  to eat, he does  not strive  to 
learn how to plant the tree in order  to have regular  
supply  of the fruit.  That  is the nature  of the life of other  
creatures;  the food that the first turtle-dove  ate is the 
food  that all other  doves  that  has come  after  still eat till 
today.  There  is no difference  in the food  of the partridge.  
The,  hawk  has, from  time immemorial,  run after  chicks  
to feed  on  them,  same  for kolokolo  which  never  changes  
its walking  steps  and the deer  never  jokes  with  leaves  of 
okra. The bat sleeps,  always  with  its head  bent down  
and the owl hoots  about  all night  through.  The squirrel  
goes  about  entangled  to the epithets;  the Edun  and the 
donkey,  the chimpanzee  and the monkey:  all of them  
make  the trees  their  habitat  and  they  jump  from  one  tree 
to the other  all their  lives.
But human  beings!  Human  beings!  Human  beings!  
Human  beings  are restless!  Constant  thinking  makes  
human  beings  restless.  If we consider  it well, we will  
find out that  it is because  of this gift of God that keeps  
man  permanently on his toes until  death.  Who  among  
you can beat  his chest  and say that  he is contented  with  
life. There  is none,  I am  certain  that there  is none.  If we 
examine  it this  way,  we find  that  none  is contented.  Man







keeps  seeking  greater  heights,  no matter  how  high  his 
present  position.  Man always  looks  for better  ways  of 
doing things to derive greater  fulfillment.  No one 
running  after  money  ever  feels  that he has had enough  
and  if a man  is doing  business,  he will  want  the business  
to keep  growing  forever.  This  is the cause  of discontent  
in the world.  One  can  look  at wealth  in another  way,  that 
is to be able  to feel satisfied  with  whatever  position  one 
is by simply  remaining  unruffled  whether  one attains  a 
higher  status or not. Satisfaction  will come  if one is not 
greedy  in seeking  greater  wealth  and greater  height;  to 
remain  content  with what one has without  feeling  
envious  of the attainment  of others;  this is the kind of 
contentment  we are talking  about.  A man  can  be content  
with  what  he is such  that even  if he lacks  in other  ways,  
it will  not matter  to him  nor affect  the way  others  look  at 
him. However,  if one is content  with  what  he has but 
looks  for ways  of improving  upon  it, it still amounts to 
contentment.
Discontentment  with money  is the greatest  of all 
and some  people  can do just anything  to have  money.  
We lie if we say that money  is not important  in the 
world,  but there  is a limit  to the importance  of money.  
Money  is neither as important  as human  beings  nor as 
important  as one's soul. Many  people  on earth have  
reduced  themselves  to despicable  people  because  of 
money;  because  of money  they  become  false,  and some  
even  turn away  from God. By the time I finish  telling  
you this story you will come to understand  the 
importance  of being  content  and the different  situations
158




human  beings  can place themselves  in because  of 
money.  The  story  goes  like  this:
There  lived a man in the olden  days whose  name  
was Kotemilorun.  The father and mother  of 
Kotemilorun  were as wealthy  as any reasonably  rich 
person  can  be. They  sent  him  to school,  trained  him  and 
he was well  bred.  When  he completed  his studies,  they  
gave  him  a storey-building  and  bought  him  a saloon  car 
and he lacked  nothing.  His paternal  uncle  was equally  
wealthy  and never  denied  him anything that he asked  
of him. Yet, Kotemilorun  was restless.  This was firstly  
because  the father  of one of his friends  was richer  than  
his own  father  and that displeased  him. Secondly,  this 
friend  of his was cleverer  than he was. On account  of 
these,  he was sad and went  about  with  a brooding  face,  
never  smiling  and never  warm  towards  people.  Later  
on, his father  died  and in his will  he left behind  twenty-  
five thousand  poun4s.  Twenty  thousand  of this money  
was for Kotemilorun.  He also left him six houses  and 
numerous  landed  property.  Not too long  after  this, his 
mother  died and left him the bit she had. By this time,  
Kotemilorun  himself  had about  twenty-five  thousand  
pounds  and he decided  to do business  with  the money.  
He started  and  the business  was  doing  very  well  and  his 
wealth  was growing  in leaps and bounds  and within  
two  years,  he had  more  than  forty  thousand  pounds.
This  was the time  his friend's  father  died  and  when  
his will  was read,  he left about  sixty  thousand  pounds  
for him and Kotemilorun  was enveloped  with  sadness.
 159 






So he promised  to look for money  to any extent  and 
with  any  means.
He therefore  planned  to use the forces  of evil in aid 
of his quest.  He went to one old man who was well  
known  as the head  of the cult of wizards  in the whole  
environ  and narrated  his problem  to the man, that he 
was looking  for money by all means and from  
anywhere  he could  find  it.
The man remained  silent for a while. When  he 
spoke,  he asked  Kotemilorun to  leave  and return  after  
some  time.  When  he got back  there  the second day  and 
the man started  speaking,  what  he said was terrifying.  
He said,  'My  son, it is not difficult  for you  to find  money  
if that is what you want; what is difficult  is the 
conditions  for finding  it. First, you have to turn your  
back to the Almighty  God and embrace  the devil,  the 
king  of the underworld  and  the controller  of all evils  in 
this world;  the owner  of fights,  boasts,  sorrow,  regrets  
and weeping  that human  beings  experience.  You will 
see, face  to face,  my lord  the devil,  and  you  will  use  your  
tongue  to criticize  God the King before  the devil.  You 
must accept  the devil as your master  and you must  
promise  to deliver  your  soul to him; that anytime  you 
leave  the world  you  will  go to him.  You  must  do all these  
things. For this reason,  I want  you  to go back  home  and 
give  it a serious  thought  and come  back  to let me know  
if you  are ready  to do these  or not.'
That  was what  the man said and Kotemilorun  left 
him and went  home.  When  Kotemilorun  returned  the 
next  day,  the man  asked  him to go back  home  again  and
 160


ruminate  over the matter  for seven  whole  days. He 
went  back again  and came  back the seventh  day. The 
man  asked  him,  'What  is your  conclusion  on the matter  I 
discussed  with  you?'  Kotemilorun  answered  and  said,  'I 
have  given  it good  thought  and I want  to get rich  by all 
means  possible.'  The  man  asked  again,  'You  are ready  to 
turn your back to Almighty  God, your creator?'  
Kotemilorun  answered  and said,  'I am ready.'  He asked  
once  again,  'You  are ready  to give  your  soul  to the devil,  
my lord, the manager  of hell, for a11 your  life and after  
your death?'  Kotemilorun  said, 'I am totally  ready.'  
After  all this,  the man  told  him  all the items  that  he must  
bring.  He must  look  for various  domestic  animals  all in 
sevens  and  in pure  white.  If he was  going  to bring  goats,  
they must,  be seven  white goats, if he was bringing  
sheep,  they  must  be completely  white  and they  must  be 
seven.  He must  bring  seven  white  kolanuts,  seven  bitter  
kola and seven  alligator  peppers.  He should  then  pick  
seven  or fourteen  yards of white linen and sew the 
whole  clothe  into a complete  wear. If seven will be 
enough,  then  he should  take seven  yards,  otherwise,  he 
must cut fourteen  yards of white cloth and use it 
completely  as nobody  must  use out  of the cloth.
Kotemilorun  went  to look  for all these  items.  When  
he got them  complete,  he took  them  to the man's  house.  
The man  took  them  away  and asked  him  to come  to his 
house  at eleven  thirty  in the night  on an appointed  day 
and  he must  come  robed  in the white  regalia  that  he had 
sewn.
Kotemilorun  turned  up at exactly  the appointed  
time.  It was a matter  of great  surprise  to him  that  he did







not find a single  person  in the house  any more. All the 
wives  and children  of the man had left the house  and 
there  was  nobody  in the house  except  the man.  When  he 
came,  he met the man  outside  but the man  entered  the 
house  on his arrival.  He came out from the room at 
exactly  twelve  midnight,  completely  transformed.  He 
was wrapped  in palm  fronds,  soaked  in blood,  his eyes  
were glowing  red. He no longer  talked  like a human  
being  and he was panting,  rolling  around  as if he was 
devoid  of intestine  and as if he was ready  to fly like a 
bird.  He waved  to Kotemilorun  to stay in front  and he 
obeyed.  When  they  left the house,  the man  went  in front  
and  was  moving  rather  slowly  ahead  of him.  The moon  
shone  like  noon  time,  Kotemilorun  was  in white  and  the 
man  was  in palm  fronds.  The  road  was  lonely  and  quiet.  
They  met nobody  and nobody  crossed  their  path  until  
they were completely  out of town.  After  ten minutes  
since they had been walking  in a bush  path, the man  
turned  on to a small  lane and Koterriilorun  followed  
him. When  they had  walked  for about  a hundred  feet;  
the road  suddenly  became a wide  and  well-swept  road  
and lemon  grass  was planted  on both  sides  of the road.  
After  a while,  the grass  gave way to some  okika  tree. 
These  were later replaced  by akoko  trees and shortly  
after,  they  moved  unto  a plane  terrain, and  on the sides  
of this plain  land were arranged  small  stools  like the 
ones  used  by market  women.  They  were  not as high  as 
chairs  at all.
As soon  as they  arrived  at their  destination,  the man  
who  brought  Kotemilorun  suddenly  transformed  into  a 
bird and Kotemilorun  began  to feel lonely,  but on
 162



looking  ahead,  he found  that there were at least five 
other  human  beings  who  were  not in the bird  status  and 
who  wore  white  garments.  They  were  also  newcomers.
One of the old members  shouted  in a sonorous,  
voice.  As soon  as he shouted,  all the birds  turned  back  to 
their  human  forms.  One of them  stood  up and started  a 
song,  and as soon  as he started  it, the others  joined  the 
song.  They  sang the song  for a while  and one of them  
started  to chant a long incantation.  When he had 
chanted  this incantation  for a while,  a human  thigh  
suddenly  dropped  from heaven.  The man carried  on 
with  the incantation  and another  thigh  dropped  again  
and  he still  continued  with  the chant.  After  a long.while,  
an arm  dropped,  a leg dropped,  a hand  dropped,  a neck  
dropped  and when a head dropped,  all these parts  
came together  and became  a man. The man was 
hideously  frightening.  The back of his head was bent  
like the foot of a walking  stick. The man was very tall 
and fat and he was  wearing  a raffia  skirt  and garjnent.  
His two bulging  eyes were  as big as a human  fist and 
they shone  like stars. His lips were big and gave the 
mouth  the appearance  of an unduly  big mouth.  His 
teeth  stuck  out of the lips and feathers  protruded  from  
the arms  that  were  not covered  by the palm  fronds.  He 
wore  iron  shoes  whose  tips were  shaped  like the feet of 
ducks.  His fingers  were big and thick like those of 
hawks.
As the arms and legs assembled  and produced  a 
man,  a chair  and a table  emerged  from  the ground.  Abig  
book  laid on the table. The creature  sat on the chair.
 163







opened  the book  and started  to reel out names.  As he 
called  the names,  he made  certain  enquiries  and made  
various  kinds  of promises.  Below  are the questions  he 
asked  from six of those  people.  We shall give each of 
them  a fictitious  name  like Lamorin  (Fellow)  and we 
shall list them one after the other. We shall call this 
creature  Chairman.  This was how the questioning  
proceeded:
Chairman:  You  are First  Fellow?
Fellow:  Yes.
Chairman:  You  were  born  on June  2,1922.
Fellow:  Yes.
Chairman:  You have totally  rejected  Almighty
God?
Fellow:  Yes.
Chairman:  You  have accepted  me in place of
Almighty  God.
Fellow:  Yes.
Chairman:  Who  owns  your  soul  after  death?
Fellow:  You.
Chairman:  Who  am I?
Fellow:  You  are the King,  Esu Elegbara,
Controller  of intrigues  and the 
manager  of all the pandemonium  on 
earth. You are the chairman  of 
treachery,  chairman  of trouble,  
chairman  of all the sorrows  of the 
world.




Chairman: You understand  clearly  and certainly  
that you have no share in all the 
comforts  of heaven  and that you will 
go to hell  after  death?
Fellow: It is clear  to me.
Chairman: When  are you  due  to die?
Fellow: Twenty  years but according  to the 
written  statement  with Death, you 
had said that you wish  to shorten my 
life and had removed  five years  from  
my time  on earth.
Chairman: If I said so, it means  I have  shortened  
it. What  I am asking  you now is how  
much  time  is left  for you?
Fellow: It remains  fifteen.
Chairman: How  much  money  did  I give  you  last?  
Fellow: One  thousand  pounds.
Chairman: What  do you  want  today?
Fellow: One  million  pounds.
Chairman: Go, you will receive exactly  what  you 
request.
That  was  how  the Chairman  ended  the interrogation  
with the first Fellow  and moved  on to the Second  
Fellow  and  it went  like  this:
Chairman:  You  are Fellow  Two?
Fellow  Two: Yes.
Chairman:  You  were  born  on  July  6,1931.
Fellow  Two: Yes.
 165



Chairman: You  have  accepted  me as your  lord?  
Fellow  Two: Yes.
Chairman: You  have  rejected  God  Almighty.
Fellow  Two: Yes.
Chairman: Who  owns  your  soul  after  death?
Fellow  Two: You.
Chairman: You  know  who  I am?
Fellow  Two: Very  well.
Chairman: Proclaim  my  name.
Fellow  Two: You are Esu, king for numerous  
human  beings,  Elegbara,  king  of hell,  a 
spirit  deployed  to curse  other  spirits,  
an effigy  that surpasses  other  effigies,  
owner  of the house  of fire, custodian  of 
a two thousand  amulets,  two 
thousand incantations,  authority  over  
all the properties  in the world.
Chairman: You know where  you and I will be 
after  death,  don't  you?
Fellow  Two: I know  it very well, it is hell, since I 
have turned my - back on God  
Almighty,  and I have forfeited  the 
gentle  wind  of heaven.
Chairman: How  much  did you ask for during  our 
last  meeting?
Fellow  Two: I did not even ask for money  then. I 
simply  asked  you  to help  me deal  with  
my rival who wanted  to snatch  away  
my  husband  from  me.
Chairman: What  position  is your  rival  now?




Fellow  Two: She walks naked  in the street now,  
homeless.  She sleeps  in food stalls,  a 
complete  leper.
Chairman:  What  is your  request  today?
Fellow  Two: Money.
Chairman;  Like  how  much?
Fellow  two: Twenty  thousand  pounds.
As soon  as she said this, all other  members  of the meeting
grumbled,  wondering  why only twenty thousand
pounds!
Chairman:  Only  twenty-thousand  pounds?
Fellow  two: Make it one hundred  and twenty  
thousand  then.
Chairman:  You will receive  according  to your
request.  How many more years do 
you  have  on earth?
Fellow  two: It remains  thirty after you have  
removed  your  own  five  years  from  it.
Chairman:  Go. Go on enjoying  your  life.

That was the questioning  pattern  for Fellow  Two.
Now  to the third  Fellow.
Chairman:  You  are my child,  the Third  fellow?
Fellow  Three:Yes.
Chairman:  You  were  born  on July  14,1932.
Fellow  Three:Yes.
 167





Chairman: Whom  do you love more  between  me 
and  God?
Fellow: It is you.
Chairman: Why?
Fellow: God is impartial,  just imagine,  he 
makes  rain  to fall on both  the good  and 
the bad people  of the world.  He gives  
children  to good people  and the bad 
ones. But you are different.  If I send  
you to deal  with  my enemy  today,  you 
will act promptly.  Why won't  I love 
you?
Chairman: But I hope you know  that your soul 
becomes  mine  after  your  death?
Fellow  Three:  It is clear  to me.
Chairman: You also know that we shall both  
reside  in hell?
Fellow  Three: Yes.
Chairman: My child,  I love  you  very  dearly.  I hope  
you have not forgotten  that hell is 
different  from the gentle breeze  of 
heaven?
Chairman: I know  anyone  living  in hell  will  suffer  
till eternity  and the one  in heaven  will 
live in happiness  till eternity.  But all 
that is after death. I want to enjoy  
myself  in this world  first. You are in a 
certain  heaven  right now and that 
heaven  is sufficient  for me. Do 
whatever  I want  for me now.
168



Chairman:  What  do you  want  right  now,  my dear
child?
Fellow  Three: I  want two very important  things.
First, two hundred  and thirty  
thousand  pounds.  Secondly,  I want  
the death  of a certain  person.
Chairman:  Name the person  and tell me his
offence.
Fellow  Three: He  is known  as Tamedo,  I have  never  
set my eyes on him and I don't  know  
him. I am not in any kind of contest  
with  him  but he is too famous  and the 
fame  angers  me. That  is all.
Chairman:  I am behind  you in all these.
Regarding  money,  you know  that it 
does not constitute  any problem  for 
me and before you get home, the 
money will be in your bedroom.  
About Tamedo,  I myself hate all 
human  beings  created  on earth by 
God and  I hate  anyone  that  is famous.  
It is a thing of sorrow  for me to see 
people  living  well and in success.  But 
the wisdom  of that fellow  called  God  
is much;  he is cunning,  wily. He has 
provided  a guiding  angel for each  
human  on earth  and anyone  under  the 
protection  of an angel  and  who  has not 
offended  anyone  is protected  by the 
sword  of the angel,  which  is sharper







than a knife.  So, both of us must  put 
our heads  together  and  cause  Tamedo  
to commit  an offence  against  us and 
once he offends,  the sword of his 
guardian  angel will be blunt. I will 
then go and recruit twelve of the 
demons  under  my control  in hell to go 
and confront  the guardian  angel of 
Tamedo  and they shall surely  subdue  
the two of them. We must certainly  
remove  Tamedo  from the world,  at 
most  in the next  four  weeks.  We must  
cause  him to sin so that the sword  in 
the hand  of his guardian  angel  will go 
blunt.
Fellow  Three: Master,  when  you said you do not 
want  anybody  on earth  to be famous,  
what  about  us, don't  you  want  us to be 
famous?
Chairman:  What  kind  of question  are you  asking?
Am I referring  to you people?  You are 
my children  and your enjoyment  is 
limited  to the remaining  short period  
you  have  on earth.
Fellow  Three: What  is the nature  of the eternity  that 
we are going?
Chairman:  I have told you people  several  times
that where  I am, there is suffering  
unlimited.  If you are thirsty,  you will 
find no satisfaction  even  if you drink  
up a whole  river.  You will be hungry




and you will not be filled  up, even  if 
you eat all the food in the whole  
world. You will suffer all these  
because  you have had all your own  
enjoyment  while on earth and you 
have turned your back to God  
Almighty,  but  since  I can  withstand  all 
these sufferings.  Should  you not be 
able  to withstand  them?

As he raised  that question,  everybody  on seat chorused
that  they  would  be able to withstand  it.
Chairman:  How many  more  years do you have
on earth?
Fellow  Three:  Thirty-three  full  years.
Chairman:  Have you removed  my own five
years?
Fellow  Three:  I have  deducted  it.
Chairman;  Go. Money  awaits  you at home  and as 
soon  as I get to hell  I will  find  out ways  
of removing  the famous  Tamedo  from  
among  the living.
After this, Fellow  Four stepped  forward  and this
was  how  his own  questioning  went: 

Chairman:  Fourth  Fellow,  I notice  that you did
not attend  the last  meeting.
Fellow  Four: It is so, mylord.
Chairman:  I hope  there  is nothing?
171




Fellow  Four: Nothing,  but that was the day  I had to 
fly overseas  to fetch  my relation  whom  
I promised  to present  as a gift at this 
meeting.
Chairman:  Were  you  able  to get  hold  of him?
Fellow  Four: Kabiyesi,  I could  not. In fact, I almost  
perished  there as his guardian  angel  
was so powerful.  I only  just managed  
to fly back to attend  this meeting.  I 
have  not  fully  regained  my strength  as 
that angel almost succeeded  in 
clipping  all my  wings.
Chairman:  What a pity! Let me examine  your  wings.


As he said this, the man changed  into a bird and flew 
before  Esu. As soon, as Esu touched  his feathers,  all the 
remaining  feathers  flew off  and he had  no feathers  left on 
his arms. Suddenly,  all the members  changed  into birds  
and  started  to eat up the featherless  bird  until  they  ate it all 
up. After  this, they became  human  beings  again  and sat 
back  on their normal  seats. The bird  remained  completely  
dead  under  Esu's  seat.

The man who took Kotemilorun  to the meeting  
explained  why  the fourth  fellow  was killed,  'The  path  of 
falsehood,  theft,  waywardness,  character  assassination,  
death,  disease,  filth,  greed/  discontentment:  all of these  
are in the hands  of Esu, the king  of hell,  but Esu  hates  to 
be deceived.  It must  be that Fellow  Four  lied to Esu in 
his report  on what  happened  to him. It must  be that  the




man  he said  almost  defeated  him  actually  defeated  him 
and that  the feathers  with  which  he flew  to the meeting  
were  borrowed  plumes,  otherwise,  the feathers  would  
not  have  fallen  off  his wings.  All of those  at the meetings  
were  soldiers  of Esu on earth.  That  was why  all of them  
joined  hands in killing  the one who deceived  their  
master.'

Fellow  Five was a total cripple  and anybody  who  
saw  him  on earth  must  certainly  pity  him  because  when  
he was in his human  form  his feet were  rolled  up to his 
buttocks and the buttocks  were  folded  up and he could  
hardly  sit down  with  it. It was like the hard  crust  of the 
monkey's  buttocks  and when  he changed  into a bird,  
the body  of the bird  was  rough  and  awkward.  If one met 
him on earth,  one would  almost  speak  rudely  against  
Almighty  God  for creating  a human  being  that  had  that 
magnitude  of deformity  on his body. But when  you 
listen  to what  he said  in this terrible  meeting,  you  would  
rejoice  with  God  for creating  him as he did. Had  he not 
created  him like that,  he would  have  greatly  destroyed  
the handiwork  of God as he would  have  harmed  many  
of God's  beloved  ones.
This was the exchange  between  him and Esu, the 
Chairman  of all troubles:
Chairman:  Fellow  Five,  three  men  rolled  into  one,
I hope  all is well  with  you?
Fellow  Five: I am well,  my  lord.
Chairman:  I think you have about twenty-five
years  left on earth?





Fellow  Five: It is more:  thirty  years.  That is after I 
have deducted  your  five years  out of 
it. 

Chairman: I hope you have put out of the way  
your  junior  brother,  the child  of your  
mother's  rival whom you talked  
about  last  time?
Fellow  Five: That  was easy. I even  brought  part of 
his blood  here.  It is in my  blood  bank.
Chairman: I hope  your  request  to me is not much  
today?

Fellow  Five: Not  much  at all, only  three  requests  as 
follows:  First,  I want  my father  to die 
before  our next meeting  and I want  
his first son and first daughter  to die 
also so that I can inherit  my father's  
property.  His two children  are older  
than I am and he has himself  
overstayed  his welcome  on earth  and 
he should  go. Second,  I want my 
friend with whom I work as a 
gateman  to go blind  as he reduces  the 
amount  of work  that  I do. And  thirdly,
I want five hundred  pounds;  one 
hundred  for my father's  burial,  one 
hundred  to bury  the first  two  children  
that  I mentioned  and I will live on the 
remaining  three  hundred  pounds.

Chairman: I will do for you all these  things  you 
ask for. I would  have completed  all
174





of them before we have another  
meeting.
It was a matter  of great  marvel  to find that this one 
was  a very  important  chief  but  when  he stood  before  
the Chairman  it became  clear  that chiefs  are greater  
than  chiefs.  This  was  what  they  discussed:


Chairman:Are you not the chief  that came  to the 
meeting  from  the north?
Chief: Yes.
Chairman:  This is the third  time that you will 
attend  the meeting.
Chief: Fourth  time,  my  lord;
Chairman: Was it not at the last meeting  that,  you 
asked  for four  thousand  pounds?
Chief: Yes, my lord and all the money  is 
completely  finished.
Chairman: And  you  want  a little  more.
Chief: It is true.
Chairman: How  much  more  do you  want?
Chief: I want six kingship  crowns;  two of 
them  should  be filled  with  diamonds,  
two filled  with  gold and the rest two 
filled  with  silver.
Chairman: Are  you  a crowned  king?
Not at all, I want  to use the crowns  to 
attract  the favour  of all the important  
kings  to myself.
Chairman: That  is not difficult  at all. My servants  
will  bring  the crowns  to your  house.'






Chief: I am grateful.
Chairman: When  should  I be expecting  you?
Chief: In hell?
Chairman: Yes,  in hell.
Chief: I have only six years left. It should  
have  been  eleven  but I have  deducted  
the five years  that I am supposed  to 
deduct.  I even  want  to know  what  the 
place  looks  like.
Chairman: The place  has no benefit  of any sort; it 
is because  I have no other  place  to go 
that is why  I am there.  It is the prison  
that  God  Almighty  had  kept  me in.

That  was how  they all came  before  Esu, the king  of 
all evil people  and held their  meetings  at the dead of 
night. Kotemilorun  saw all kinds of human  beings  
there:  those  who  were  white  and those  who  were  black,  
those  who  were  neither  white  nor black  but yellow  like 
banana,  including  those  that were  very tall and those  
who  were  as short  as imps.  There  were  those  who  were  
all fat and  fully  blown  and  there  were  those  that  were  as 
short as manikins,  all of them present  in the place,  but 
those  who  were  black  were  in the majority  because  they  
had  not held  a worldwide  meeting  where  people  of the 
four  corners  of the world  would  be represented.
Later on, the Chairman  asked if there were  
newcomers  in the fold and there were six new ones  
including  Kotemilorun  among  them. We shall give 
them  their  own  identities;  we shall call the first  person  
A and  the second  person  B, and  so on.
 176




When  they  brought  A before the Chairman,  this  was 
how  their  discussion  went
Chairman:  What  is your  name?
A: A is my name.
Chairman:  Which  year  were  you  born?
A: I was  born  in 1935.
Chairman:  Who  will  you  worship  as from  today?
A: I will  Worship  you.
Chairman:  Should  I write  your  name?
A: Write  it.
After  that, the chairman  asked  him further  saying,  
'What  do you  want  me to do for you? A then  answered  
that,  'I want  to be rich.'  The  Chairman  asked  him,  'Is five 
thousand pounds  enough  for you?' To which he 
replied,  'It is more  than  enough  for me.' The Chairman  
asked  him to go home and that he would  find the 
money  in his  bedroom  and  he went  away.
When  it was  the turn  of B, this  was  how  it went:
Chairman:  What  is your  name?
B: B is my name.
Chairman:  Who  will  you  worship  as from  today?
B: It is Jesus.

The  Chairman  was  furious  and  all the people  joined  
him in his anger  entreating B not to say so or mention  
Jesus  again, and so on. The Chairman  asked  him  again.  
I know  who you were worshipping  before  but who  
shall  you  worship  from  today  on?'





B: It is Jesus.
Immediately,  the Chairman  brought  out a club 
which  is known  as Elegbara's  whip  and drove  B away  
completely  from the gathering.  Trouble  almost  broke  
out in the meeting  because  the one coming  after this 
fellow  provoked  the Chairman  even  more.  We shall  call 
him  D and  this  was  the exchange  between  them.
Chairman: What  is your  name?
D: My  name  is D.
Chairman: Do you  know  your  date  of birth?
D: I don't  know  it.
Chairman: Let  me check  it out  for you.

As soon  as the chairman  said that, he put his hand  
under  his table and brought  a big book and when  he 
checked  through  it he said, 'July  17,1929  was  your  date
of birth.'
Chairman: What  do you  worship?
D: It is Mohammed.
Chairman: I said  what  do you  wish  to worship?
D: I forgot.  It is Allah.
Chairman: I know  you once worshipped  Allah,  
but now  that  you know  me, what  will 
you  worship?
D: (After  some  hesitation)  I will worship  
Allah  throughout  my life.
 178


The Chairman  was greatly  enraged  that  he shouted  
and started shooting  his tongue  in and out  like a snake  
and his teeth stuck out and bent like the drumming  
stick.  He said, I ask you, will you worship  me as from  
today or will you not worship  me?' The fellow  
answered  again,  'It is Allah  that I will  be worshipping.'  
Esu  pulled  out  his club  and  chased  him  out.
After  that,  he started  speaking:
A! A! A! This  is what  my life has become.
Those  of you mocking  me, it is enough.
Those  of you deriding  me, it is enough.
Those  of you seeking  me out and bringing  people  to 
me, it is enough.
I must  put  an end to it today.
I shall  no longer  take  any  nonsense. .
It is the Allah  you are calling  now that turned  me into 
what  I am.
Yet my sin was mere  jealousy.
I was  jealous  of  God  Almighty.
That  was  why  the hosts  of heaven  rose  up.
And  said  I must  certainly  leave.
Then  God  the King  raised  up my hands.
And  threw  me into the morass.
Where  I remain  until  this very  day.
The morass:  the home  of judgment,  of crisis,  of fire, 
and  of prison.
Home of pain, of derision,  of treachery  and of 
wickedness.
The  home  of sorrow  and  of  trouble.
179







The  home  of danger  and  of filth,
The  home  of humiliation  and of  cataclysm.
I go from  suffering  unto greater  suffering,  tears upon  
tears.
Hissing  upon  hissing, that  is my lot in hell.
For  one to be hungry  and to eat without  being  satisfied.  
For one to be thirsty  and drink  all the water  in a whole  
river  without  quenching  the thirst.
For the house  to be in utter  darkness,
For one to be beaten endlessly  by the sun and be 
covered  by sweat.
For  rain to fall and the body  becomes  pitiably  cold.
That is the position  the one you worship  has left me, 
you  humans. 
That  is where  he left me, me Elegbara.
I, Esu the wonder  one,
I, Satan,  who  leaves  his food  at the crossroads. 
Anyone,  anyone,  and I say  for the third time, anyone  
that brings  a newcomer  and has not confirmed  from  
him that  he has  forsaken  my enemies  will  suffer  beyond  
his imagination.
I can turn that fellow  into a rat who  feeds  on remnants
all about.  I can turn him into a grasscutter  feeding  on 
weeds.  I can even turn him into a poisonous  snake  
which  human  beings  will cut down  with their  cutlass.
I, the king  that is greater  than  kings,  Alaiyeluwa,  Esu, 
Elegbara,  king  of hell.
 180



Henceforth,  nobody  dared  provoke  the Chairman  
into anger.  Everybody  got before  him  to declare  him as 
their  lord.
After completing all these, he asked  each  person  to 
bring all the white domestic  animals  that they had 
brought.  Kotemilorun  did not know  that the person  
who brought  him had deposited  his own materials  
where  others  had  kept  theirs  as he did not see anything  
with  him,  not knowing  he had flown  the things  on his 
wings  before  Kotemilorun  arrived  there  by midnight.
When  they  brought  all the white  domestic  animals,  
it was a heavy  pile indeed.  They  then  distributed  bags  
known  as Apo eje (bags of blood)  among  them. The 
bags  were  completely  decorated  with  feathers.  The bag 
was  made  of rubber.  After  that,  they  distributed  human  
skulls and the skulls were up to two hundred  in 
number.
When  they cornpleted  this ritual, the Chairman  
rang  the bell  for food.  Immediately,  the meeting  fell into 
dead silence  and the people  started  looking  at the 
domestic  animals.
After  casting  a close  glance,  one of them  would  put 
his mouth  inside  a bag and pour  plenty  of blood  in it. 
After  a while,  another  person  will  untie  the mouth  of  
the bag  and  plenty  of blood  would  emit  from  his mouth.  
After about thirty-five  minutes,  all the domestic  
animals  started  collapsing  and dying, having  been  
completely  drained  of blood  and  flesh.
Then the Chairman  commanded  everyone  to use 
the skulls  to fetch  blood  from the bags with their  right.







hands  and lay their  left hands  on Apo Eje in readiness  
for oath-taking.  He read out the oaths and they all 
repeated  after  him.  When  it came  to the point  of calling  
names,  everyone  would  call his own  name.  This is the 
one Kotemilorun  read:
I, Kotemilorun,  son of Ijangbon-ade,  from  the town  
of Inunibini,  take this skull, a human  skull, and the 
blood  therein,  to make  this testament  today,  July 18, 
1959,  with  this great  king,  who  is the controller  of hell, 
Esu, Elegbara,  Satan, father  of Hades,  that, as from  
today,  I surrender  my soul to him. I have  become  his, 
from  today,  he becomes  mine,  I give him my soul, my 
heart, not just as long  as I live, but also after  my death.  
When  I close  my eyes  and  say goodbye  to the world,  the 
Angel  of God  must  not come  to meet  me, but instead,  it 
is Esu's  demon  that  will  come  to take  me to this  friend  of 
mine  in his abode  in hell.  Whatever  suffering  my friend  
goes  through,  we shall share  it, his cries  will be shared  
with  me, his hisses  shall  be hissed  with  me. But in this 
testament,  Esu  has his own  respoiisibilities  that  he must  
fulfill, he has his own  work  to do; anything  that I want  
on earth,  he must  find it for me. If I want  money,  he 
must  get me money.  If I want  a child, he must  get it for 
me. If I want  position,  Esu  must  not deprive  me of it.
Whoever  I want  dead  shall die, whoever  I want  to 
make  ill must  be ill, anyone  that I want to be put in 
trouble  must face trouble,  and whoever  I want to 
retrogress  must fall into retrogression.  You, the one 
thousand  demons  on the earth,  bear witness  to what  I 
have said; you the wizards  of the earth,  hear what  I





have said; you witches  of the earth,  hear what  I have  
said; you great  herbalists,  hear what  I have said; you 
powerful  magicians,  hear what  I have  said. I will now  
lift this  skull  of blood,  put it in my mouth  and drink  it 
rapidly.
That  was  how  they  all proceeded.
When  they had finished  drinking  the blood  in the 
skull  that  they  first  fetched,  they  went  ahead  to finish  all 
the blood  in the bags  of Apo  Eje. When  they  drank  it all 
up, they all began  to spank  their bellies  shouting  for 
food  and even  for more  drinks.  The travail  that  God  set 
before  those  evil people  was that  no matter  how  much  
food they ate, they would  continue  to hunger,  and no 
matter how much  they drank,  they  would  continue  to 
thirst.
At the end of this meeting,  the Chairman  greeted  all 
of them  very profusely.  As he ended  his greeting,  his 
body  began  to fall apart,  gently.  The arms  went  its own  
way,  the legs  went  with  the buttocks,  the neck  departed  
from  the head.  The  man  who  said  the incantation  which  
brought  the Chairman  started another  round of 
incantation  and soon,  the arms  left, the legs went  away,  
the buttocks  departed,  the hands  left, the chest  left, the 
neck  went  its way,  and when  the head  departed,  it went  
with  the table  and  the chair.
Suddenly,  one man  among  them  suddenly  shouted  
in one sonorous  voice,  like a bird's  voice,  and all the 
people  started  transforming  into birds. Kotemilorun
 183 







also became  a bird as a result  of the mystical  power  he 
had  received  from  Esu  and  he went  back  home  like  that.
That was how all of them that went to that evil 
meeting  went  back  home.  I want  you to remark  all the 
difficulties  that they all went through  knowing  fully  
well  what  hell would  look  like and in spite  of that,  they  
all took oath to live there for eternity  all because  of 
what?  All because  of money.  None  of them  failed  to ask 
for money  and the one Kotemilomn  asked for was 
enough  to turn  him  into  a rich  man  for the rest  of his life.
Before  they  left the meeting,  one of the newcomers  
asked  Esu why  he was deducting  five years  from  each  
of their lives. Esu responded  to his question  thus,  
'Anyone  who lives in suffering  always  wants other  
people  to suffer  along  also, because  the very thought  
that he is not suffering alone makes his  suffering  more  
tolerable.  Those  of us in hell suffer  a great  deal unless  
we want to deceive  ourselves  and the suffering  is 
everlasting,  that is why we look for company.  That is 
why  I want  you  to come  quickly  to join  me.'
When  another  person  asked  when  their suffering  
would  commence,  whether  it would  be immediate  or 
whether  they would be treated as guests before  
suffering  commenced,  Esu retorted,  'Even  before  you 
close  your  lids to the world,  your  suffering  would  have  
started,  my disciples  will come  and meet  you, clubbing  
you down.  You alone will behold  them, the earthly  
people  with  you will not be able to see them.  They  will 
only hear  your  voice.  Therefore,  enjoy  your life to the
 184 




fullest  while  on earth  before  you start  your  suffering  in 
hell.'
For many  years,  Kotemilorun  did not spare  much  
thought  for his end but when  it was three  years  before  
the day  he would  die,  he was  found  discussing  with  one 
of his friends  whose  name  was Oyeori  one day. He said 
to him, 'Oyeori,  do you think  that there  is any place  to 
go after death?'  Oyeori  said, 'It is true my friend,  did 
you not hear people  say that there are two kinds of 
heaven-  one where  there  is the breeze  of blessing,  the 
other,  hell and may God forbid  that one should  go to 
hell.' Oyeori  was not aware that Kotemilorun  had 
signed  a pact  with  Esu and that he had chosen  to go to 
hell after death.  He answered  Oyeori,  'Don't  listen  to 
them.  I don't  believe  that after death  there  is another  
place that one's soul would  go to and even if Esu 
himself  told  me that,  I would  not  believe  it.'
He wanted  to be consoled  by others  but when  his 
death  was three  hours  away  and he knew  he was going  
to die, he had a slight  headache.  Certain  that  his hour  of 
death had arrived,  he spoke in a very bitter voice,  
saying,  So it is true that I have  only  three  hours  left on 
this  earth.  Only  three  hours  before  I start  suffering,  start  
weeping  and start  hissing.  That  I will don the cloak  of 
sprrow  that I will never  shed,  that I will wear  a cap of 
gruesome  pain  that  I will never  remove  from  my head;  
when  I will put on a trouser  of trouble that I will  never  
remove.  Ah! my Maker,  my Maker,  my Maker,  how  
come  you could  not cause  me to change  my mind  when  
I was  hatching  these  burdensome  thoughts!  My Maker,






my Maker,  Ah! my Maker,  you are the only comforter  
left  with  me, my  Maker.'
When  it was five minutes  for him to depart  from  
this world,  Esu came with  his host  of demons  to take  
him  away  and he alone  saw  them  while  those  who  sat 
around  him could  not see them.  They first heard  a 
loud shout.  Ah! Elegbara,  Elegbara,  Elegbara,  don ’t 
take  me away  forcefully.  Ah! You  are pricking  me with  
your  nails  too brutally!  Inside  the eye! At the back  of 
the eye! Ah! Why club me on the straight  line of the 
nose?  Ah! That  one is spanking  me at the back  of the 
head.  Ah! Esu, the lord of wonders,  this suffering  is 
too much!  Ah! This  one  hits  me with  a rod in the front!  
Do you want to make me blind?  You fell me, you 
pulled  my leg, dragging  me along on a carpet  of 
thorns. Eh! This  is my life! This  is what  you  have  done  
to me? Money,  money,  money,  money,  ah! Money,  
money,  money,  money,  mo-ne-ne-y-o.  That  was how  
Kotemilorun  departed  from  the world.
Let us repeat  the fact once  more.  It is good  to have  
money  but a man should  not run after  money  beyond  
reason.  Some people  turn themselves  to slaves for 
money  and  there  is nothing  they  would  not do to get it. 
Some  would  even  accumulate it for nothing,  unable  to 
spend  it usefully  for themselves;  the food they eat 
would  be worse  than the food of the poor man; the 
clothes  they wear would  be dirtier  than that of the 
partridge;  their  home  would  be no better  than  an eating  
place  and  yet their  money  fills the banks.  To me, it is as
186





if such  people  have curses  on their  heads  and people  
like that love money  more  than their children.  It is a 
good thing to have money,  but those who have  
exchanged  God  for money  have  sinned  greatly.
This  is where  I will  pause  for today,  come  tomorrow  
and  hear  a bit more.
187




Nine
Day Three in the Home  of Enudunjuyo

On the third day that people  have been assembling  in the 
compound  of Enudrmjuyo,  the Mogaji  of the House  started  
speaking  thus:
Citizens  of Ajedubule,  you  will  find  that  on each  day 
of your visit to this place, I have spoken  on certain  
characters;  traits of human  beings, and I have  
exemplified  each trait with a story. Today,  I want to 
begin  with  a riddle  and I want  you to resolve  the riddle  
and it is the meaning  of the riddle  that  will provide  the 
subject  for today's  talk.
One  day, a woman  went  to look  for a deadly  poison  
which  could  instantly  kill whoever  tasted  it and she 
poured  the medicine  in a spring  and two people  died  
after  drinking  the water.  Everybody  then  knew  that  the 
water  had  been  poisoned  and therefore  people  stopped  
fetching  water  from  the stream.  What  kind  of character  
can  we compare  this  poison  with?
When  he spoke  this  way,  nobody  was  able  to resolve  
the riddle  and after a while  nobody  could  detect  the 
kind of poison  it was, he told them it was called  
ingratitude.  Anyone  who  was shown  kindness  and did
188






not appreciate  it had blocked  the way for others;  that 
person  is a deadly  poison  among  people  and nobody  
would  want  to show  kindness  to such  a person  or any 
other  human  being  as a result  of his or her imgrateful  
character.  An ingrate  brings  unhappiness  for people,  
he is a wicked  person;  an evil  person  who  wears  human  
flesh  but has the head of an animal.  They  are the salt 
that has gone sour in the world;  they are scorpions  
among  humans;  they have become  green snakes  in 
green  grass  who are not fit for decent  company.  They  
are not  well  bred  people;  they  are thorny  epithets  in the 
grove and in the undergrowth;  they will reap the 
reward  of their  handiwork  on earth  and if they  do not 
reap it on earth, certainly  they will be found  guilty  
before  the advocates  of God  in heaven.
Listen  to this story which  will clarify  this riddle.  
There  was once a man with  two wives  and each wife  
bore him a child each and each child was male.  The 
man named  the first child, Obedini  and the second  
child,  Obedeji  and  he lived  in the town  of Ogbon-aiye.
The two children  grew  up and became  traders.  No 
sooner  had they started  trading  than  their  father  died  
leaving  one thousand  pounds  for each of them.  
Obedini  remained  in the town  and continued  with  his 
trade  which  became  so prosperous  that  he married  two 
wives  within  six months  but did not marry  any more  
wives  after  these  two.  Obedini  was six years  older  than  
Obedeji.  When  he married  his two wives,  Obedini  had 
no idea of what  women  were  like. The first wife was 
called  Ami and even  though  she did not bear children
189







all the while,  he loved  her exceedingly  because  she was 
faithful  to him and he never  saw her with any other  
man.  The second  wife  bore many  children.  In fact, she 
already  had three children  while  the other  wife had 
none;  she did not even  get pregnant  by accident.  After  
some time, the childless  wife's  love for her husband  
began  to reduce  but the man  did not suspect  anything.  
She used  to sell things  for her  husband  within  the town  
but later, she took permission  to carry the wares  to 
other towns.  This was not a coincidence  as she had 
started  a relationship  with  a man  who  lived  in the town  
she was carrying  her wares  to. Obedini  did not know  
what  was happening  and he showed  so much  love to 
her that she had no reason  to start a quarrel.  In fact, 
Obedini  went  to the extent  of pounding  yams  for her to 
eat, grinding  pepper  for her soup and fetching  water  
for her  to bathe.
In spite  of all these,  this  woman  no longer  loved  him 
as she used to do. Whenever  she went to visit her 
concubine,  the man  would  insult  Obedini,  criticize  him 
and ridicule  him  to the extent  that  the husband  became  
worthless  in the sight  of his wife.
Even though  this woman  no longer  loved her 
husband  as much, yet she did not want  him to die. But 
she had so revealed  the secrets  of their home  to her 
concubine  that it would  be easy  for the man  to kill her 
husband  if he so desired.  Obedini  usually  slept  in the 
farm  on Saturdays  since  their  church  was in their  farm  
and  he was  one of the pillars  of their  place  of worship.
What  Ami's  concubine  said to her on one occasion
190





would  show  you the kind  of person  he was.  When  Ami  
was preparing  to return  home  after  paying  him a visit,  
he said to her, 'Ami,  I admire  you so much  and you can 
see that  I love  you so much  but this useless  husband  of 
yours  does  not  befit  you  and  you  also do not  love  him  as 
much  as you love me, so we have to find a way of 
dealing  with  that  husband  of yours.'
Ami answered  and said, 'True,  I am staying  with  
him so that he can provide  my food.  I love you more  
than  I love  him  but there  is nothing  we can do about  it, 
since  we cannot  kill him.'  He answered  again  and said,  
'We can  kill him  of course,  why  can't  we kill him?'  Ami  
responded  that she did not want  Obedmi  to die as he 
had  been  taking  care  of her for a very  long  time.
The  name  of Obedini's  farm  was  Onigbanja  (kolanut
farm);  this was because  there  was plenty  of kolanut  in 
the farm. One day, Obedeji  went to the town of his 
brother's  wife's  concubine  to sell things.  The name  of 
the town  was Ibajeode.  He was strolling  along  a path  
and decided  to ease  himself  in the bush.  From  where  he 
was,  he saw a man  and six young  men  talking.  The  man  
was sending  them  on an errand  thus, 'When  you get to 
the town, ask for the road that leads to the farm of 
Onigbanja.  When  you get to Onigbanja,  ask for the hut 
of Obedini.  When  you  find  it, go elsewhere  to play  until  
night  falls. At about  midnight,  go to the hut and you 
will  find  that  all the doors  in the hut  would  be shut  from  
both inside  and outside.  You should  lock the doors  
from outside  and set the hut on fire and get it 
completely  burnt  down.  That  Obedini  is the husband  of 
'the woman  I am befriending  and I want him dead.
 191 






Listen  once  more  and do not forget:  the name  of the hut 
is Obedini ’s hut and the name  of the farm  is Onigbanja's  
farm.  That Obedini  is the husband  of a woman  called  
Ami.  Please  do not  forget.  The  town  is called  Ibajeode.
That what was the man said and the yoimg  men  
heard  him  and  wrote  down  all the names.
But this discussion  was  said to the hearing  of 
Obedeji,  the younger  brother  of Obedini  and it was  on a 
Saturday  when  Obedini  was to go to the farm and 
anybody  who  wished  to see him must  get to the  house  
before  two  o'clock  in the afternoon,  otherwise  he would  
miss  him.

Obedeji  had given many business  appointments  
between  one o'clock  and three  o'clock  and transport  to 
Obedini's  town  was scarce.  What  Obedeji  did was to 
hire a motor-cycle  and send a messenger  to warn  his 
brother  not to go to the farm until he arrived  in the 
evening  of that  day.
The messenger  met Obedini  at the entrance  of his 
house,  already  leaving  for the farm,  but  on receiving  the 
message,  he had  to send  somebody  to Onigbanja  to alert  
the church  members  that he would  be imable  to come  
that day. As he was looking  for somebody  to send.  
Ami's  sister  from the same mother  who came  to visit  
them volunteered  to go and even sleep on the farm  
overnight.  The  woman  had come  to deliver  a portion  to 
Ami which when used will make her pregnant  
instantly.  The  woman  went  to Onigbanja.
Obedeji  arrived  very late in the night  but when  he 
narrated  what  he overheard  to his brother,  the latter  
refused  to believe  the story, saying  that Ami had  no







other man beside him in her life. The following  
morning,  somebody  brought  news  from  the farm  that 
Obedini's  hut had been completely  burnt  down  and 
Ami's  sister  was  also  burnt.
When  Ami arrived  and her husband  queried  her, 
she denied  flatly  and  even  cursed  herself  if she ever  had 
any  other  man  beside  him.  She said  if she was  having  an 
affair with anybody  apart from her husband,  a lion 
should  kill and eat her but the husband  washed  off the 
curse.  She wept  bitterly  over  the death  of her sister  who  
got burnt  in the inferno  because  she loved  her very  
dearly and the money  she gave her to make the 
pregnancy  portion  was much.  Besides,  she knew  that 
her sister  must  have  taken  the portion  to the farm.
Ami  did  not go to Ibajeode  for a long  time  because  of 
what  her  husband  said  to her  but  her  lover  kept  sending  
numerous  secret  messages  to her and she kept  sending  
back  replies.  One day, the man  wrote  Ami a romantic  
love  note.  It read  like  this:
My true  Ami,  my dear  Ami,
Please  bring  a needle  fast and sew up my heart  that has 
been  torn to pieces  by love.  I am  flooded  daily,  ashy  the waters  
of the ocean, by your love, it has covered  up my soul, 
swallowed  up my heart  completely.  If  you do not come  to see 
me, then  you want  me dead.  If I don't  see you I shall  run mad.  
If you don't  arrange  to meet  me somewhere,  then  you want  to 
clothe me with a garment  of unrelieved  sorrow.  I see an 
unfolding  morning  sky, it lacks  your  beauty;  I look  at the sun
193







at dusk,  it can not  stand  where  you stand;  I look  at the feathers  
of okin,  none  of  them  come  near  you in terms  of beauty;  I look 
at the flowering  plants,  none  of  them  equals  you, so also is the 
cattle-egret,  and the fresh pod of the corn; even with the 
brightness  of  the noon-sun,  none  is as white  as the whiteness  
of the teeth  in your  mouth.  Now,  now, now, I tell you that if I 
don't  see  you in the next five  days,  do not ever  expect  to see me 
again  because  I shall  kill myself because  of you.
I remain  yours forever,
Onibaje-Okunrin.

This was the letter  that  Ami  received  and read and 
which  the husband  must  not see. She started  looking  
for ways  to go and see Onibaje-Okunrin.  She tried  all 
ways  without  finding  any, she then told her husband  
that somebody  was owing  her money  at Ibajeode  and 
she wanted  to go and collect  the money  and the 
husband  who  also did not want  her to go told a lie that 
he was  expecting  a visitor  which  he wanted  her to cater  
for. So she could  not  go.
The death  of Onibaje-Okunrin  was not heard,  nor 
did he become  mad as he threatened.  However,  there  
are many  wicked  people  in this world  and so, the man  
found  other ways of trapping  Obedini.  One day, he 
picked  his lorry  and went  in the direction  of a certain  
farm alone  where  he saw a man on the road, hit him 
with the vehicle  and the man died. It was about  six 
o clock  and it was getting  dark,  so nobody  saw him as 
he carried  the dead  body  and  put  it inside  the lorry,  shut  
all the windows  of the lorry  and  headed  for the town  of
 194 







Ogbon-aiye  where  Ami and her husband  Obedini  
resided.  He arrived  at Ogbon-aiye  at about  nine  o'clock  
and  parked  his lorry  somewhere  and  took  a stroll.
When  it was  exactly  one o'clock  in the dead  of night,  
he picked the corpse and headed  for Obedini's  
backyard,  gently  deposited  it there  and  went  his way.
When  the day broke  and people  saw the corpse  at 
the back  of Obedini's house,  there  was uproar.  People  
started  shouting  and went to the king's  palace  and 
Obedini's  enemies  went and called  the police.  As it 
happened,  Obedeji  was on a journey  at that time.  
Without  prolonging  matters,  the police accused  
Obedini  of murder  and they locked  him up, pending  
the  prosecution  of his case.
When  messengers gave  information  to Obedeji  that 
his brother  was  in the cell,  he was completely  confused.  
When  he was going  to the police  station,  he had two 
thousand, five  hundred  pounds  to fight  the case  but as 
soon as the police  refused  the bail of his brother,  he 
began  to move  around,  using  all the cormections  he had 
to prove  that his brother  was incapable  of murdering  
anybody.  He went  to the houses  of a Sergeant  and a 
Corporal  and made lengthy  explanations,  and then  he 
went to engage  a lawyer  for his brother.  The lawyer  
demanded  for five hundred  pounds  to prosecute  the 
case  which  he said  was a difficult  case  and  Obedeji  paid  
all the money.  In the end, his brother  was bailed  with  
the sum  of five  hundred  pounds.
Up to this point,  nobody  knew  the cause  of death  of 
the corpse  but the lawyer  insisted  that a doctor  should
 195







perform  an autopsy  and explain  the cause  of the man's  
death.  It was a government  doctor  that performed  the 
autopsy  and said  that  he believed  the man  was  killed  by 
a vehicle  and  the death  took  place  about  four  days  ago.
The police then sent secret service  men out to 
investigate  the case.  They  combed the whole  town  but 
could  not get a shred  of evidence  and they  also went  to 
the neighbourhood,  yet they could  not secure  a single  
lead.
Nobody  suspected  that Onibaje-Oktmrin  who was 
chasing  after Ami could be responsible  for such a 
hideous  act. One day, when  Ami was away  and only  
Obedini  was at home,  somebody  brought  a letter  to the 
house.  The letter  was written  to Ami  but the letter  was 
addressed  to Mrs Obedini  and out of curiosity,  he 
opened  the letter.  What  did  he see?
My  very  important  Ami,
Your  husband  must  have  been  killed  by now  because  of  the 
corpse  they  found  behind  his house.  I am the one to marry  
you,  Ami,  you don't  know  what  is going  on! I shall  make  sure 
that that your husband  is completely  dead. When  we meet 
again,  I shall tell you how the corpse  found  its way to the 
backyard  of your home. Do not let anybody  see this letter,  
please.
I am yours  forever,  
Onibaje-Okunrin
196


Obedini  was visibly  shaken  and he did not think  
twice before  handing  over the letter to his brother,  
Obedeji  and they  both  went  to the police  station.  When  
they handed  over the letter to the police, they  
dispatched  plain  clothes  men  to go to the town  where  
Onibaje-Okunrin  resided.  They went straight  to the 
man's  house,  and lo and behold,  they were pleased  
because  as soon  as they  got to the front  of the  house  they  
saw  a lorry  and  on enquiry,  they  were  informed  that  the 
vehicle  belonged  to the man.  They  found  out about  his 
occupation  and they were told that he was a driver.  
They  began  to inspect  the body  of the vehicle  to see, if 
they could  find any evidence  that would  show  them  
that it was used to kill the man that was brought  to 
Obedini's  house.  Truly,  even  though  it was about four  
days  after  the incident,  there  was  blood  on the silencer  
under  the vehicle  where  even  the driver  wouldn't  have  
noticed.
To make  a long story  short,  they arrested  Orubaje-  
bkunrin  on the spot and put him in handcuffs.  In the 
end, Onibaje-Okunrin  was convicted,  given a death  
sentence  and hanged.  When  news  got to Ami  that her 
lover  had been  killed,  she did not eat throughout  the 
day but it did not show on her face that she was 
mourning  anybody.
Soon after this incident.  Ami went to Ibaje-ode  
again.  It was getting  dark  by the time she was leaving  
home  and  her  husband  warned  her not to go since  there  
were stories  of many dangerous  animals  along that 
route, but she turned a deaf  ear and left. She promised  
to return  on the third  day.
 197



After  three  days,  she did not come  back,  nor did she 
return  on the fourth  day.  On the fifth  day, her husband  
set out to look  for her. On his way,  he was  informed  that 
a lion  killed  and ate a woman  on the night  that  Ami  left 
home. People  living in the vicinity  of the incident  
picked  the woman's  cloth and kept it. When  Obedini  
heard  this,  he began  to suspect  and  when  they  gave  him 
the woman's  clothes,  he recognized  them as Ami's  
clothes;  the shawl, the scarf and wrapper  were all 
blood-soaked.  It was a moment  of great sorrow  for 
Obedini.  What  was worse  was that when  Obedini  was 
crying  for his dead wife, only a handful  of people  
sympathised  with him. When  he got home,  he wept  
very loudly.  Instead  of consoling  him, most of the 
people  were laughing  at him, saying  that it was Ami  
who cursed  herself  asking  the lion to kill her and the 
lion  merely  obeyed  her curse.  It was  not clear  if the lion 
would  have  killed  her whether  or not she had so cursed  
herself.  What  was  clear  to everyone  was  that  Ami  swore  
that  a lion  should  kill her and a lion  killed  her. May  God  
not  make  this  kind  of thing  our  portion  in life.
Being  an itinerant  fellow  prevented  Obedeji  from  
early  marriage  but the story  of how he got married  is 
worth  narrating.  For good seven  years,  he never  set 
eyes on the crown  princess  of their town who was 
known as Ara-oto  (a unique piece of wonder).  
However,  immediately  he set his eyes  on her, he lost  his 
peace  of mind.  After  some time, he lost his appetite.  
Every  morning,  he would  go to a vantage  point  from  
the palace  and would  wander  about.  As God would



help  him,  this  woman  came  out  up to twelve  times  as he 
roamed  the place.  At one point,  he was the chairman  of 
eight committees  and the king had sent him to 
represent  him in certain  meetings  up to four times.  
Obedeji  went to carry out those assignments  on all 
occasions.
From the third occasion,  this woman  had taken  
special  note  of him.  One day, as he sat with  three  of his 
friends,  a lady came  up to him and told him that the 
Crown  Princess  wanted  to see him. Everybody  seated  
there was afraid  in case Obedeji  had committed  an 
offence.  He got ready  and went there. When  he got 
there,  they  took  him  from  one  big mansion  to the other  
and finally  brought  him to the corridor  of a huge  
compound  and asked  him to sit there  and wait  for the 
princess.
It took a while  for the lady  to come  out to see him.  
When  she came  out, her whole  body  was glittering.  As 
soon as she sat down,  she dismissed  the retinue  of 
female  attendants  with  her.
When  they had left, she started  speaking.  'Surely  
you must be surprised  to receive my message.  
Somebody  who  never  hides  anything  from  me told me 
that he heard  you talking  about me, insulting  me, 
criticizing  me and condemning  me, so I decided  to find 
out  from  you  what  I have  done  wrong.'
Obedeji  almost  fainted  after  hearing  her speak like  
this, so he started  stammering,  'No, no, no, no, no, 
Kabiyesi,  who? Who, who, who, who, is the person,  
that, that, that, that said so, that, that lied against  me




so?'  Ara-oto  smiled  gently,  waved  him  to stop,  and said,  
'Sit down,  what  are you chasing  me around  for? I have  
been  observing  you and  I found  that  anywhere  I went,  I 
found you there.' Obedeji  answered  and said, ' If 
nobody  told you then you just thought  so, I was not 
insulting  you,  please  forgive  me, Kabiyesi,  I always  like 
to hear you speak,  that is why.' The princess  again  
replied.  In that  case  am I lying?  But she said  this with  a 
smile. He also replied,  'No, Kabiyesi,  not at all.' To 
which  she too replied,  'I thought  you said I was lying,  
well,  maybe  you should  be going  before  your  wife  gets 
angry?'  Now  Obedeji  could  speak  a little  and  he said,  'A 
wife?  Why  should  I find one?'  She too responded  and 
said, 'You  better  don't  deceive  yourself,  we only  want  to 
help you take care of your wife.' That was how the 
princess  spoke  and  joked  a great  deal  with  Obedeji.
After  a while,  the king  who  had been  out for some  
time returned.  As the trumpet  sounded,  the princess  
asked  Obedeji  to start going.  Before  he left, however,  
she asked  him  when  next  he would  be able  to come  and 
see her again in the palace and he gave her an 
appointment  for six days  from  that  day.
Obedeji  did not know  what  to make  of this. Could  it 
be that the princess  would  be willing  to marry  him or 
what?  He thought  about  it deeply  without  a conclusion.  
On the third  day, he saw the princess  walking  past  the 
back  of his house  with  only  one  female  courtier.  Obedeji  
greeted  her but she did not answer.  On the second  day, 
Obedeji  walked  by the  public  place  in front  of the palace  
and saw  the lady  standing  with  some  people  in an open
200




space.  He greeted  her respectfully  but she just went  on 
with  her  talk  without  a reply  to his greetings.
The third day after that was the day Obedeji  
promised  her that  he would  come  to the palace.  He got 
there  before  remembering  that  he forgot  to ask her how  
he would  gain access  to her on the appointed  day. The 
first time he saw her, it was the lady that the princess  
sent to call him that showed  him how  to gain  entrance  
to the palace.  Shortly  after  he arrived  on this day, rain 
began  to fall and he had  to take  shelter  in one bukataria  
near the palace  and the bukataria  was leaking  thus  
leaving  him  completely  soaked.
At about eight o'clock the next morning,  the 
princess  again  sent a message  that she wanted  to see 
him at about  six-thirty  in the evening.  He then asked  
the maid  how  he would  gain  entrance  into  the palace,  to 
which  the lady replied  that she would wait for him at 
the gate  and  that  the princess  was  crossed  with  him  that 
he did  not show  up on the day  he was  supposed  to come  
and  see her. Meanwhile  he was  there  without  being  able 
to see her. He had waited  in the hope  that somebody  
Would  come  for him  but  no one  came.
At exactly  six-thirty  of the next  day, he had arrived  
at the palace  and the messenger  promptly  took him 
inside  the palace.  There  was  no smile  on the lady's  face 
when  he got there  as she frowned  in protest  for making  
her to wait in vain when  he was to come  and see her. 
Obedeji  then  explained  to her that  he came  and that  he 
was even  beaten  by rain  but  he could  not gain  entrance.  
The princess  then started  laughing  because  she knew
201



that  he came  and  that  she did  not  explain  how  he would  
get to see her,  so she was  just  teasing  him.
They  had a pleasant  time  together  this time  around  
and Obedeji  began  to feel that  there  must  be something  
in him  that  appealed  to the lady  and she was  not trying  
to harm  him. When  he was going  away  this time,  she 
saw him off to the open. She told him that she was 
inviting  him for a feast along  with her friends  on a 
certain  day  and  she told  him  the date.
Obedeji  was a very handsome  man indeed.  He 
made  a special  dress  for that occasion.  The dress  was 
not that expensive  but he wore  it in a style  that  made  it 
look expensive.  He wore a purely  white  agbada  and 
sokoto  and the laundry-man  gave it very thorough  
ironing  and the long trouser  matched  it very nicely.  
When  he put  on the fitting  cap and  a gold  wristwatch  on 
his left hand,  all eyes  that beheld  him did not behold  a 
bush  man.
In the morning  of the second  day, the princess  sent  a 
message  again  to thank  him for coming  and that she 
wanted  to see him at five o'clock  in the evening  of that 
same  day. Obedeji  went.  After  sitting  for a while,  the 
princess  took him round  the palace  showing  him all 
kinds  of things  and then  she showed  him one diamond  
wristwatch.  The lady told him that that was the 
wristwatch  she would  give to the man  that she would  
marry. Obedeji  answered  and said,  'That  person  has hit 
luck.' They walked  on, talking  and the diamond  
wristwatch  was  in the lady's  hand.
202



After  a while,  they got to a point  where  there  were
many  heavy  chairs  and  the lady suddenly  grabbed  his 
I hand  and  asked  him  to let her see how  fat his wrist  was.
She suddenly  tied the wristwatch  on his hand  and said 
that  she had  given  it to him  as a gift.
Obedeji  opened  his mouth  and could  not close it
again  and he said, 'I taught  you said that  you will give
this wristwatch  to the person  you will marry.'  And  she 
answered,  'That  is so.' The man  was frightened  and  he
shook  visibly.  What  did he have  to deserve  marrying  
the princess?
The woman  then burst into laughter  saying,
'Everything  on earth  has its own burden.  We women  
who  are born  into  prosperity  have  our own  burden.  We 
cannot  just confront  a man  whom  we love  for marriage.
Look  at my case,  you  who  should  first  approach  me did
not approach me and I who  should  not approach  you 
was the one who  first approached  you.  The words  that 
should  come  from  your  mouth  came  from  my mouth.  
Obedeji,  you appeal  to me very much. I like your  
character  very much.  I like your comportment  very  
much.  I like the way you talk very much.  I like your  
home  very much.  I like your ways very much and 
everything  that  belongs  to you  appeals  to me. I tell you,  
as I have  liked  you  today  is the same  way  I will  like you
sixty  years  from  today.  I will  like  you  when  you are ill, I 
I will  like you  when  you  are in difficulties,  I will  like you
when  you in need,  I will like you forever.  It will please
me for both  of us to get married  to each  other  in future,  
my dearest  beloved  one.'
203






That  was  what  the woman  said  to Obedeji  which  he 
could  not find words  adequate  enough  to reply  her. 
After  some  time  however,  he spoke  and said, 'My lord,  
please  permit  me to speak  out what  is on my mind.  
Since  the day  I set my eyes  on you  my  heart  had  become  
troubled  and  to remove  your  picture  from  the top of my 
soul became  difficult.  Therefore,  if I had enough  
money,  if I had enough  good  looks,  if my family  had 
been  more  important,  it would  have  pleased  me to no 
end, but look, I am too small to carry your  
requirements;  you are a princess. This  is what  we must  
deliberate  upon  between  ourselves.'
Ara-oto,  the princess,  ended  the matter  by saying,  'I 
knew  your  estate  before  I said  what  I said  and if it is the 
matter  of money,  it is nothing.  My father  has heard  
about  us, my mother  knows,  and all my relations  have  
approved  our affair.  My father  has promised  the sum  of 
ten thousand  pounds  to me, my mother  promised  four  
thousand  pounds.  They  have arranged  the house  we 
will live in, and they  have  set aside  the car we will  both  
drive  about.  Therefore,  come  close,  my beloved  and let 
me give  you my love.'  As she said this, they  embraced  
and kissed  each  other.  Obedeji  reported  this to all the 
important  people  in their  house.  Without  prolonging  
the matter,  they  wedded  just  two  months  after.
Ara-oto is so beautiful  because  she had never done  
any  tedious  thing  since  she was  born.  However,  instead  
of being pleased  with Obedeji's  marriage,  Obedini  
became  jealous.  The wealth  of his younger  brother,  his 
prosperity,  his popularity,  all of these  displeased  him
204



and  he became  a sorrowful  man.  When  people  met  him 
he frowned  at them.  When he came  across  people,  he 
would  seal up his lips, hissing  or fighting.  He had 
forgotten  that it was his younger  brother  who got him 
out of trouble  the first time, who saved  him from a 
major  problem  the second  time and who spent one 
thousand  pounds  on him.
Obedeji  is someone  who is very trusting.  He 
believes  that  it is not difficult  for people  to be kind  and 
so, Obedeji did not suspect  his elder  brother  at all and 
he hid nothing  from  him.  Having  married  a princess,  he 
had  become  a rich  man.
The first thing  he did was to invite  his brother  and 
give him money  for business.  He gave him two 
thousand  pounds  to trade with and he gave one 
thousand  pounds  to his brother's  friend  as a loan. He 
also counseled  that they should  go to other  places  to 
trade.  Ara-oto  was pregnant  at the time. The three  of 
them  set out to other  towns  to trade.  Obedeji  bought  
goods  worth  two thousand  pounds,  his brother  also 
bought  goods  of the same amount  while his friend  
bought  goods  worth  of one thousand  pounds.  As they  
moved  from town  to town  selling  their goods,  it was 
Obedeji's  goods  that  everybody  was  buying.  It was  as if 
he had put a charm  of sales on his articles.  That also 
made  his  brother's  jealousy  stronger.
After  some  time,  Obedini  and his friend  planned  to 
kill Obedeji.  They planned  to throw  him inside  the 
ocean. They were in a big white man's ship and 
everybody  knew  that sometimes,  those  at the deck  of
205






the ship could fall into the ocean  without  anybody  
being  aware  of it. They  tricked  Obedeji  to one side  of the 
upper  deck  where  there  were  only  the three  of them.  As 
they stood  and Obedeji  peeped  into the ocean  as the 
ship was moving,  they picked  him up suddenly  and 
threw  Obedeji into  the ocean.  They  planned  to stay  long  
on the trip so that when  they got back to town,  they  
would  say that it had been long since they parted  
company  with  Obedeji.
What  they did not know  was that Obedeji  was a 
swimmer.  He had  learnt  how  to swim  on his numerous  
trips and since  he did not live for long  periods  in their  
town,  they were not aware  of this fact. He began  to 
swim  and as he was getting  tired,  he got to one island.  
That island  was full of numerous  goods.  It was as if 
robbers  used  the place as their  warehouse.  He saw one 
box and when he opened  it, he found that it was 
glowing  red with a load of pound  sterling  and he 
opened  another  which  was  filled  with  gold  coins.  There  
must  have  been  a shipwreck  during  which  a flood  blew  
so many  minerals  unto  that  island.
Soon after, he saw a fishermen's  canoe yonder.  
Quickly,  he dashed  into the river and swam  up to the 
canoe.  On getting  there,  he begged  the fishermen  to 
come  help  him  pick  the boxes  from  the island.  He found  
out the location  they were and he realized  that his 
hometown  was  a traveling  distance  of two days.  On the 
second  night,  he got home.  It was a big surprise  to his 
wife  that  he came  back  so quickly  but  when  he narrated  
his experience,  they both thanked  God Almighty  and
206



they  waited  in bitterness  for the arrival  of Obedini  and 
his friend.
It was only  two weeks  after  this that the king  died.  
According  to the tradition  of the town,  a woman  could  
not ascend  the throne  but if the king's  first child was a 
woman  and she was married,  her husband  must be 
crowned  king  after  the death  of the king.  Since  Obedeji  
was  well-liked  in the town,  there  was  no controversy  at 
all and he was crowned  shortly  after  the king  climbed ,
the rafters  (died).
It was months  after Obedeji  ascended  the throne  
that Obedini  came  back to their town.  As soon as he 
arrived,  he headed  straight  to the palace  to find out 
whether  they had heard  any news  about  Obedeji,  not 
knowing  that Obedeji  had become  king. His guilty  
conscience  and fear did not permit  him to settle  down  
first  before  going  to the palace. 
As soon as he got to the palace  and went to the 
compound  allotted  to Obedeji  and  his wife,  he was  told 
that they had moved  to another  place.  They  went to 
fetch  Ara-oto  and as soon  as she came,  he went  straight  
on to tell his pack  of lies. 'Kabiyesi,  it was the second  day
after  we left home  that we parted  company with  your  
husband.  I went towards  India and got to Ceylon,
Calcutta,  and I even got to China.  My friend  went  to 
Egypt  and  sold  his goods  in the land  of the Jews  and  the 
Lebanese  but your husband  headed  towards  South  
Africa  and I think  that he got to Ghana,  Freetown and  
Gambia.  But it is a surprise  to me that he has not 
returned.  It surprises  me a great deal. But, Kabiyesi,
207




have  no fear, he will soon  be back  as it must  be that  he 
had so much  business  to handle.  As you very well  
know,  my younger  brother,  Obedeji  would  make  sure 
that he sold all his goods  before  coming  home.  I greet  
you  for  holding  forte,  Kabiyesi.'
That was what Obedini  said and when  he would  
receive  a response,  it was from his brother's  mouth.  
Obedeji  came out of the room,  with a crown  on his 
head, he had become  a king and this was how he 
answered, 'This  is me, Obedeji.'  Obedini  almost  entered  
the ground.  The  king  continued  with  his speech  thus:
Obedini,  Obedini,  Ah! Obedini!
You  have  rubbed  the sharp  point  of the family's  sword  
on the ground.  You have  destroyed  kinship,  you have  defied  
the thorns.  You wrestled  with  God and turned  your  back to 
God  Almighty  who  created  you.
Obedini,  where was your conscience  when you were  
lifting  my leg, carrying  my arm? When  you were planning  
with your  friend  and when you both threw me inside the 
ocean?
Obedini,  would  you be alive today  if it were not  for me? 
Would you have found money to trade without  me? 
Ungrateful  people  like you have destroyed  humanity,  you 
have turned  human  beings  into snakes,  and you make  people  
run away  from showing  kindness.  If I were the Creator,  
thorns  would  grow on the ingrate  instead  of hairs. Thorns  
and bastard  weeds,  barbwires  and sa-nga  should  be the lot of



ingrates  so that human  beings,  would  not move near them.  
What  are they?  Worthless,  unthinking  trees!  What  are they?  
Mere monkeys,  dashing  from tree to tree! What are they?  
Scorpions  that all humans  flee  from!  They  are earthy  people,  
mere excrement  among the children  that God Almighty  
created  into this world. Call me my police men; tie up 
Obedini's hands  and legs. Try afresh  tree  around  his neck  and 
cast him into a deep  flood  and let the  fishes  feed on his body,  
eat his intestines,  eat his liver and eat everything  in his 
stomach.
That  was  what  the king  said.  The  King,  Alaiyeluwa,  
Death-father  and mother,  authority,  second  only to 
God;  the head  of the elephant  whose  load  is too  heavy  
for a child  to carry;  all-powerful,  trumpeting  witch  who  
relied  on medicine  and gave the child of the witch  a 
heavy  knock  on the head. The buffalo's  plank that 
cracks the teeth of the dog; the mighty one 
(kookooboto) who  hides  the big money  and brings  out 
the small  ones;  the great  warrior,  a man  whose  name  is 
evoked  to curse  other  men.

209 


Ten
The Last Days  of Adiitu-Olodumare

For seven  days, people  streamed  to Enudunjuyo's  home  to 
hear stories and words that educate  on various  human  
characters.  We have  recounted  the stories  of the first  three  days  
and we shall narrate  the rest in another  book.  Time  will not 
permit  us now  to continue  the stories.
Let us now examine  how the marriage  turned  out to be. 
During  the first year, the couple  was happy  with each other  
even though  Iyun-ade  did not get pregnant.  In short, for 
nineteen  full years, she was not pregnant.  But the couple  
displayed  what was most important  in a household.  In all 
those  years,  Iyun-ade  was never  seen in the company  of any 
man  other  than  her husband.  At times,  some  of her friends  and 
relations  would  encourage  her to get married  secretly  to 
another  man but she never listened  to them. Adiitu-Olodumare 
 continued  to love  his wife,  tending  her and caring  
for her. He would  say, 'If God  finds  that  having  a child  will  be a 
blessing  for us he will  give  us one,  but  if he finds  that  it will  not 
be a blessing  for us, let him  not give  us. My dear  Iyun-ade,  you 
are equal  to a male  and  female  child  for me.
In addition,  they did not unduly  parade  the homes  of 
medicine  men. Once, they consulted  the doctor and he 
confirmed that  there  was nothing  physically  wrong  with  both





the husband  and  the wife  that  could  prevent  them  from  giving  
birth  to children,  they  laid  the matter  to rest.
The couple  had learnt  a lesson  from the white  man who  
always  says  that it is God  that  provides  children.  In the city of 
London,  which  is the biggest  city in the world  with  thousands  
of doctors,  many  couples  have been tested  by doctors  and 
declared  fertile  but did not have children.  The reason  is this: 
God is wiser than human  beings.  He knows  today and 
tomorrow  and he knows  what  will  be in a thousand  years  to 
come.  If he finds  that having  a child  will not be of benefit  to 
someone,  he will not give that person  a child and if he finds  
that  it will  be good  for the person,  he will  give  him.  That  is how  
it is.
After twenty  years of marriage,  Iyun-ade  suddenly  got 
pregnant,  easy  and  quiet.  Indeed,  it was  up to five  months  after  
before  both  Iyun-ade  and her husband  suspected  that it was 
pregnancy.  At delivery,  it was a set of twins;  a boy and a girl. ' 
The twins  were  barely  a year  old when  she got pregnant  again.  
And again,  she delivered  another  set of twins.  Those  twins  
were exactly  a year and three months  old when she “got 
pregnant  again,  and once again,  she delivered  a set of twins  
and that was how they had six children  in their household;  
three  boys  and  three  girls.
When their firstborn  turned  eighteen,  war broke out 
between  their  town  and another  town.  All male  children  from  
age  fifteen  to fifty  had  to go to the battle-front.
From childhood,  Adiitu-Olodumare  had taught his 
children  that  whatever  they  had to do in this world  they  must  
do with all their might.  It was with this mindset  that his 
children  who  had  to go to war  went.  All his three  male  children







were  old enough  to go to that  war and all of them  received  the 
commendations  of their commanders.  They  were extremely  
respectful  and worked  with  total commitment.  They  applied  
their  mental  powers  fully  in the war. When  the war  had raged  
for eight  months,  news  came  that one of them  had died.  After  
nine  months,  it was  heard  that  another  one  had  died  again.  The 
war  ended  after  one  year  and only  one of the children  returned  
home  from  the war  with  other  soldiers  who  did  not die.
The news of  the death  of those  two children  was brought  
on a Friday.  Thus,  every  Friday,  Iyun-ade  would  engage  in 
bitter vituperations  against God Almighty,  'You God  
Almighty,  you are known  as the provider.  If it did not please  
you to give  me these  children,  why  did you give them  to me? 
They  say you are the Savior.  You who saved  the children  of 
other  people  from  this war so that they could  return  to their  
parents,  why  did you  not save  mine?  They  call you God  of the 
fathomless  gift, meaning  that your  source  of gift is as deep  as 
the ocean,  how come  that in all these  abundance  of gift, you 
could  not give us those  two children  wholeheartedly?  They  
refer to you as God Almighty,  meaning  that you have the 
power  to create  mighty  things  into  this  world,  why  did you  not 
use this power  over our children?  We sought  and sought  for 
them  but could  not have them  in good  time.  We prayed  and 
prayed  and prayed  and our mouths  almost  went  sore! I was 
forty-five years  old before  I gave  birth  to the first child  and I 
had become  an old woman  before  I delivered  the last set of 
twins.  Today,  I am completely  aged,  and I can no longer  give 
birth to a child. Almighty  God, you have made yourself  
distasteful  to me to worship. '




That was what Iyun-ade  said every Friday. Adiitu-  
Olodumare would  console  her, bearing  it himself  like a man,  
even  though  with  a sorrowful  heart.
On a certain  Saturday,  about  four  months  after  the war  had 
ended,  Adiitu-Olodumare  was given  a title in the town.  He 
planned  his inauguration  for a Saturday.  By noon of that 
Saturday,  Adiitu-Olodumare  suddenly  fled from  the scene  of 
the event  and ran home  in tears  saying  that  he saw somebody  
who  resembled  his first  son  who  had  been  killed  in the war  and 
he wept  bitterly  saying,  'Ah!  You  Almighty  God,  you  Almighty  
God,  you  Almighty  God!  How  sweet  would  it have  been,  had 
my other  male children  been on earth  on a day like today?  
How  full  would  my  joy  had  been  had  they  been  with  me on the 
dance  floor  as I danced?  How  happy  would  I be if they  were  
rejoicing  as I am rejoicing?  How  happy  would  I have  been,  had 
they  put on Agbada  garments  with  baggy  trousers  and had I 
cast a backward  glance  and all my children  be right  behind  
me?' As he finished  making  those statements,  he looked  
behind  him.  What  did he see! He saw  his two  sons  entering  the 
house.  He was frightened  because  he thought  they  were  dead  
and  it was  their  ghosts  that  he was  seeing.
After a long time, the children  began  to give reports  of 
what  had  happened  to them;  how  it was,  that  when  their  plane  
was shot, they  had used  the life-jacket  in the plane  and were  
brought  down  gently  from  the plane  and  landed  in a town  that 
was nearby.  That  was how  the firstborn  that  they  thought  had 
died was saved  and that was how the second  son was also 
saved.  They  had  both  seen  each  other  about  a month  before  the 
war ended.  After  the war, no arrangement  was made  for their  
return  because  their  officers  thought  they  had died and they




had to work  in order  to find money  to transport  themselves  
back  to their  hometown.
My people,  this is where  we shall  end this story  and I want  
you to examine  the name  of the most  prominent  man in the 
book:  Adiitu-Olodumare.  This world  of ours is a bundle  of 
hidden  truths.  Hundreds  of things  abound  in this world  that 
only  God  Almighty  can render  their  meanings.  The key of life 
is in the hands of God. We heard that Adiitu  was in the 
airplane;  human  beings  have the power  to push  the wind  to 
carry  them about  without  crashing,  but who among  us can 
make  the wind  by himself?  Who  can give  the reason  why  Iyun-  
ade did not get pregnant  until  she was forty-five  years  old and 
yet still became  the mother  of six? Could  Adiitu  who left his 
parents  with  clothes  that  were  as ragged  as dry  banana  leaves  
ever  imagine  himself  becoming a wealthy  man,  a festive  man,  
with numerous  houses,  splendid  ways and a multitude  of 
cars?  True,  Adiitu  said he dreamt  that he went  to heaven  but 
who among  us knows  what heaven  looks like except  God  
Almighty?  Could  Iyun-ade  who  had so much  derided  Adiitu,  
calling  him Giraffe-neck,  ever imagine  that Adiitu  could  still 
become  her  husband?  Had  Obedini  known  that  Obedeji  would  
become  king,  would  he have  thrown him into the ocean?  All 
these  comprise  the knot that God himself  had tied and which  
only  he can  unknot.
This is a word of wisdom  for all human  beings  and for 
school  children  in particular.  This  world  is full of knots.  If we 
settled  down  to learn,  we may be able to untie  a few of the 
things  that God Almighty  has tied. As we speak,  there are 
many  diseases  that human  beings  have not found  cure for; 
there  are many  minerals  buried  in the ground  that  we have  not







seen just as there are many  engines  that human  beings  can 
deploy  their brains  to design  and build  that they have not 
done.  Too many  words  lead to lies, and I shall cut short  my 
words.  I pray for all those of you reading  my books  that 
feathers  never  depart  from  birds,  thus clothes will not vanish  
from  your  homes.  God Almighty  will bless  you with  money,  
children  and  you  will  never,  ever,  lack  the wherewithal  to cater  
for them.  It is goodbye  for now,  greet  all your  folks  and may  it 
please  God that we meet  again.  May  Almighty  God make  it 
possible  for us to hear  good  news  about  one another.
215












