

Forest of a Thousand Daemons


THE AUTHOR MEETS AKARA-OGUN

My friends all, like the sonorous proverb do we drum the

agidigbo; it is the wise who dance to it, and the learned who
understand its language. The story which follows is a veritable

agidigbo; it is I who will drum it, and you the wise heads who
will interpret it. Our elders have a favourite proverb—are

you not dying to ask me how it goes?—they tell it thus,

'When our masquerade dances well, our heads swell and do a

spin.' Forgive my forwardness, it is the proverb which speaks.

Now I do not want you to dance to my drumming as a

mosquito to the deep bembe drums, its legs twitching haphaz-

ardly, at loggerheads with the drums. Dance my friends,

in harmony, with joy and laughter, that your audience may
ring your brows with coins and pave your path with clothing;

that men may prostrate before you and women curtsey in

sheer pleasure at your dancing. But for a start, if you want
this dance to be a success, here are two things I must request

of you. Firstly, whenever a character in my story speaks in

his own person, you must put yourselves in his place and
speak as if you are that very man. And when the other replies,

you must relate the story to yourselves as if you, sitting down,
had been addressed and now respond to the first speaker.

In addition, as men of discerning—and this is the second
task you must perform—you will yourselves extract various

wisdoms from the story as you follow its progress.

Well, I do not want to say too much at the start lest I

become a loquacious fool, one who deserts the clearly blazed

path and beats about the bush. I will rather now take up my
7



drum and set to it, and I request you to adjust your agbada,

toss its sleeve properly over your shoulder, prepare yourselves

for dancing, that the affair may dovetail neatly in the spirit of

the saying, 'I can dance and you can drum; this is the meeting

of two grubs.' That, forgive me, is a proverb of our elders.

It all began one beautiful morning; a clear daybreak it

was, the harmattan haze had retreated home, the creatures of

the forest were still asleep, those of the backyard were feeding

on the day's providence and birds were singing praises of

their Maker. A beatific breeze rustled the dark leaves of the

forest, deep dark and shimmering leaves, the sun rose from

the East in God's own splendour, spread its light into the

world and the sons of men began their daily perambulations.

As for me I sat in my favourite chair, settled into it with

voluptuous contentment, enjoying my very existence.

Not long after I was seated an old man came up to me and

greeted me. I returned him courtesy for courtesy. Observing

what appeared to be a desire to stay I offered him a chair and

turned it to face me. Once seated, we began to exchange

pleasantries and share jokes like old acquaintances. But it

was not very long after when I heard the man sigh deeply as

one whose mind was troubled by a heavy thought. Even as

I began to consider asking him the cause, he began himself

to speak thus:

'Take up your pen and paper and write down the story

which I will now tell. Do not delay it till another day lest the

benefit of it pass you over. I would not myself have come to

you today, but I am concerned about the future and there is

this fear that I may die unexpectedly and my story die with

me. But if I pass it on to you now and you take it all down
diligently, even when the day comes that I must meet my
Maker, the world will not forget me.'

When he had spoken thus I hurried to fetch my writing

things, brought them over to my table, settled myself in com-

fort, and let the stranger know that I was now prepared for

8



his tale. And he began in the words that follow to tell me the

story of his life —
My name is Akara-ogun, Compound-of-Spells, one of the

formidable hunters of a bygone age. My own father was a

hunter, he was also a great one for medicines and spells.

He had a thousand powder gourdlets, eight hundred ato,

and his amulets numbered six hundred. Two hundred and
sixty incubi lived in that house and the birds of divination

were without number. It was the spirits who guarded the

house when he was away, and no one dared enter that house
when my father was absent—it was unthinkable. But deep

as he was in the art of the supernatural, he was no match for

my mother, for she was a deep seasoned witch from the cauld-

rons of hell.

Once my father had nine children, of whom I was the eldest;

four wives and my mother was the most senior of them. She
had four children, the wife who was next to her had three, the

next two and the fourth had none at all. One day my mother
and another of these wives had a quarrel and took the case

to my father for settlement. He found my mother at fault

and this so angered her that she resolved to take vengeance
for the slight. She became so ruthless in her witching, that,

before the year was out, eight of my father's children were
dead and three of his wives had gone the same way. Thus was
I left the only child and my mother the only wife.

Look on me, my friend, and if you are not yet married

I implore you to consider the matter well before you do.

True, your wife ought to be beautiful lest you tire of each
other quickly; and a lack of brains is not to be recommended
since you must needs hold converse with each other, but this

is not the heart of the matter. The important requisite is that

your wife should not be prone to evil, for it is your wife who
gives you meat and gives you drink and is admitted most to

your secrets. God has created them such close creatures that

there hardly exists any manner in which they cannot come

9



'My name is Akara-Ogun, Compound-of-Spells.'

10



at a man; and when i tell you what my father suffered at the

hands of this wife of his, you will be truly terrified.

It happened one day that my father prepared himself and

set off to hunt. After he had hunted a long while, he felt some-

what tired and sat on a tree stump to rest. He was not long

seated when, happening to look up, he saw the ground in

front of him begin to split and smoke pour upwards from the

rent. In a moment the smoke had filled the entire area where

my father sat so thickly that he could not see a thing; all

about him had turned impenetrably black. Even as he began

to seek a way of escape he observed that the smoke had begun
to fuse together in one spot and, before he could so much as

blink, it fused completely and a stocky being emerged sword

in hand and came towards my father. My father took to his

heels instantly but the man called on him to stop and began

to address him thus:

'Can you not see that I am not of the human race? I arr-

ived even today from the vault of the heavens and it was on
your account that I am come hither, my purpose being to

kill you. Run where you will this day; kill you I most reso-

lutely will.'

When he had spoken thus, my father was truly afraid but

even so he steeled his heart like a man and said, 'Truly, as

I observe you, I know you are not of this world, and I see

also that the sword in your hand spells mortal danger for me.

Nevertheless, I implore you, and I charge you in the name of

the immortal God, do not fail to tell me the nature of my
offence.'

The man replied to him, saying, 'Do you not know that

you have grievously offended your Maker? That you have
ruined his handiwork even to this extent, that you sent eleven

souls to heaven when it was not yet the hour allotted them by
their God ?'

These words of his were a great astonishment to my father,

for while it was true that he was well versed in magic and

11



charms, he did no one any evil. So he replied to him, 'If this

is indeed your complaint then your mission is to a different

man; it certainly is not I. Since the day I was born I have
never harmed anyone: I do not see a man going about his

business and take umbrage at his existence; I do not see a rich

man and suffer thereby from envy. When I see a man at his

dinner I continue on my own way. I have never inflicted

wounds on any man, I have not shot a man down in my life,

so how can you claim my life, and for a crime of which I am
innocent!'

He waited for my father to finish his speech and then he
replied, 'True, you have not with your own hand killed any-

one, but you have been responsible for the suffering of poor
innocents. With your eyes wide open to what you did you
married a deep-dyed witch for the mere beauty of her body—is

that an act of goodness? Does the blood of your many wives

not call out to you? Does the crime against your eight child-

ren not hang round your neck? And, despite all of this, do
you have the gall to tell me that you have never been guilty

of evil? Indeed there is no remedy; kill you I must.'

Only then did my father call to mind the kind of woman he

had taken to wife, and so he replied to him, 'Truly I see now
that I have sinned. I have a wife whom I cannot control, I

strut like a husband merely in name. What I should have done
I have left undone, the path I should have trodden I have
neglected, the creature who deserved to die at my hand I have
indulged with praises. Ah, stranger from the dome of heaven,

forgive me.'

When he heard this, the man forgave my father and desist-

ed from killing him, but he warned him that he must, the

moment he returned home, put my mother to death. So saying,

he turned into the forest and continued his travels that way.

When he had gone my father took up his gun and returned

home. And it so happened that the path he took led him past

a field of okro on the way to the town. It was evening when

12



he came there, the moon was already up, and, coming up to

the field he looked over to the other side and observed some-
one approaching from that direction. Quickly he climbed up
a tree, waiting to see what this person was about. The figure

came on unswerving until it vanished into a large anthill.

Shortly afterwards, an antelope emerged from this anthill,

entered the field and began to feed on the okro. My father

brought his gun to bear on the creature and drove furnaces

into its skull. The gun had no sooner roared than there came
from the antelope a human cry and the words, 'Ah, woe is me!'

That night my father slept in a little hut by the field. When
daylight broke he went to the spot where the antelope was shot,

but he found nothing there, only blood. He began to follow

the trail of blood, and it was with increasing astonishment that

he found that the trail led homewards. He followed it until he

arrived right home. But in midtown the trail vanished comple-
tely and he did not come upon it again until he was nearly at his

own doorstep: then it led him straight into my mother's room.
I had not myself slept at home that night. Whenever my

father was away I hated to spend the night at home because

the spirits gave one no peace all through the night. Even my
mother rarely slept at home and then only when my father

gave his permission. I returned to the house just as my father

was opening the door to my mother's room, and when he had
opened the door and we entered, that moment when I caught
sight of my mother, it was all I could do not to take flight.

From her head down to her shoulders was human enough,
but the rest of her was wholly antelope. She was all covered
in blood and swarms of flies. My father touched her; she was
dead and had begun to rot. Indeed she was the antelope steal-

ing out at night to feast in the field of okro.

And so did my mother die, and hardly was a month over when
my father also followed her. From that day was I orphaned,
fatherless and motherless. And thus ends the story ofmy parents

and comes the turn of my own. I greet your labour my friend.

13



FIRST SOJOURN OF AKARA-OGUN IN THE FOREST OF A THOUSAND DAEMONS

The experiences which my father underwent proved to be

nothing compared with mine. And when I go over it all in my
mind, I am terrified to contemplate the case of those who are

older, because if an old man began to recount all that had beset

him on the path to the hoar on his head, many young men
would pray for an early death.

By the time I was ten I had begun to accompany my father

on his hunts and at fifteen I possessed my own gun. I was
twenty-five when my father died, and, on his death, both the

money he owned and the powers he possessed, all formed my
legacy from him. Even before he died I had killed my first ele-

phant, buffaloes had fallen at my hand, there were few animals

in fact which my gun had not yet swallowed.

About the third month of my twenty-sixth year I seized my
gun one afternoon and headed for Irunmale, the Forest of a
Thousand Daemons. A huge forest is Irunmale, a full six hours

from our town. The road to it is the same as that leading to

Mount Langbodo, and that same road leads to the dome of
heaven. There is no breed of animal missing in this forest we
speak of; it is the home of every vicious beast on earth, and the

dwelling of every kind of feathered freak. Ah, a most evil forest

is the forest of a thousand daemons; it is the very abode of
ghommids.

It was quite some time before I arrived at my destination;

night was falling, you could barely make out the lines on your
palm. I was a little tired on arrival and could not even light

my lamp for some night hunting. I made a fire in the hollow of

14



a certain tree, took out a yam from my hunting bag and began

to roast it. After this I gathered up some fallen leaves and made
a bed of them. My pillow served for a hunting bag. I primed

my gun soundly and placed it next to my head. That chore

completed, I stretched out on my back and went off to

sleep.

I had not slept very long when 1 awakened, and indeed it was
the cries of ghommids coming to trade at the night market

that woke me. For while it is true that they emerge both day

and night from this forest, yet it is only at night that they con-

duct their business, and it is at night also that they bring all

petitions forward to their king who is known as Olori-igbo,

Lord of the Forests. With pity for myself do I tell you now
that that very tree underneath which I had elected to build my
fire was the abode of their king. Even up till the moment when
1 went off to sleep 1 had guessed nothing of this, and it was
only when I woke up and heard the sales cries of the ghommids
that I was smitten with fear, and, quickly seizing my gun and
securing it across my shoulders, I hung my bag around my
neck, caught hold of a creeper and climbed into the tree, little

dreaming that it was the head of the king of ghommids himself

on which I now chose to sport. Thus it was that I proceeded

to add insult to injury; that I had camped at his feet was not

enough, I had to climb the head of the unoffending man.
Some time went by after I had climbed to the distant treetops,

and then the court nobility began to arrive. A huge fire leapt

up from some a^arter and the entire surround of the tree was
lit up brightly. As the ghommids arrived they sat round the

tree; they were all of a great variety, like the clothing of ala-

genw—some walked on their heads, others hopped frogwise,

one had neither arms nor legs; his appearance was like a rub-

bery tub. Last of all came the king's crier and he began his sum-
mons thus:

'Lord of Forests! Lord of Forests! you are the merchant
prince of ghommids; I say you are the merchant prince of

15



ghommids; there is no trader to equal you. The arm of the

human kind accompanies the pounded yam when you dine,

their fleshy breast provides the meat for your eba; when you
drink corn pap, their skull serves you for a cup—what, I ask,

can a son of man do to you ? Forest Lord ! Have you lately tak-

en to walking on your head ? I say have you now taken to walk-

ing on your head? For your eyes are now where your buttocks

should be, spitting embers. Forest Leader, are you feeling tired ?

For why else have you not yet emerged? We are all assembled

and still await you.'

When he was done, the Forest Lord himself raised his voice

in a huge bellow. His voice totally encompassed the forest,

the beasts of the forest were hushed, sleeping birds were wa-
kened in their nests, fishes fled to the depths of the ocean, and
all the leaves in the forest bowed in reverence. Not one thing

rasped against the other, the lips of the forest were sealed in

silence. The voice cried, 'E-e-e-e-e. . . eh! E-e-e-e-e... eh!

That fire at my feet is the handiwork of man. Your Forest

Lord cannot come out today, do you not see that dumbbelly

object dangling from my neck?'

When he had spoken thus, they all looked up and saw me.

A-ah, the dance-prone danced, the joy-filled rejoiced, they be-

gan to count their chickens for they looked forward to killing

and feasting on me. Even as they began to plan how best to

pluck me down, I remembered an appropriate spell, egbe, the

rarifier. Quickly, I invoked its powers and at once I found
myself back in my own room, snatched thither by egbe.

When I had rested awhile and regained my composure, when
I saw that I was truly back in my own room, I felt ashamed and
said to myself, 'Is this not indeed matter for shame? I call

myself a hunter, yet on my very first outing after my father's

death I am forced to flee home in this manner! I who affect the

name of hunter! No! Sooner death than this disgrace. I shall

return to that forest—is not my name Compound-of-Spells ? The
witch who seeks to devour me will find her teeth all dropping

16


off, the sorcerer who dares to look me in the eye will provide

the next meal for my gun, any ghommid who wants to test

the keenness of my sword will lose a hand in the encounter.

The hand which takes food to the mouth always returns. The
King !

of Heaven will surely see me return home '
safely

So saying, I repeated my incantations and commanded egbe

to return me, but instead of landing me on that former tree,

I found myself complete with gun on a palm tree, punctured by

a hundred spikes. And as if that was not enough it began to

rain; it beat down on me so heavily that I was well nigh deaf

and it did not stop until near daybreak. When it was finally

spent I came down from the tree, rescued my matches from
where I had protected them from the rain, made a fire at the

base of the palm, took off my upper clothing and spread it near

the fire to dry. Before long it dried, so I took off my trousers

also and dried them. After this, I took out a little yam, roasted

and ate it. When that meal was finished I stuck my pipe in my
mouth and lit it; the smoke fanned out smoothly—I was a

much contented man.
As I sat puffing at my pipe and enjoying myself, I heard a

voice raised in loud grumbling close to a walnut tree some dis-

tance away. I raised my head in that direction and saw a huge
swarthy man who kept up a stream of moaning: 'These stink-

bugs are at work again, they simply will not give a man some
rest.' I did not so much as give him a second glance, I merely

intensified my smoking. I had recognised him, he was a walnut

troll and it was my tobacco which gave him such offence—ghom-
mids do not take at all kindly to unpleasant smells. When I

saw that he persisted in his grumbling, I turned in his direction

and proceeded to smoke him out; this only made him more
furious and he became really abusive

'Fathead, stinking corpse, when you wake you don't

wash, when you excrete you don't clean your anus, every pore

in the body oozes some smell, the entire spine is caked with

dirt.'

17


When I heard this I grew angry in turn, I faced him squarely

and said

'And do you have the nerve to revile anyone in this world!

You soot-grimy creature, you dead and bloated toad, if you
don't watch out where you stand I'll blaze fire-tracks through
your skull this instant.' When he heard this he said not an-

other word ; he merely turned his back on me, hissing contemp-
tuously as he walked away.

It did surprise me that heavy as the downpour was during

the night, the sun came out fully in the morning and shone
throughout the entire day. As it grew near the hour for a mor-
ning snack, I picked up my gun, shouldered my hunting bag
and went after game. I walked for a long time without bagging
anything; I did not even see any game at all, only heard the

voices of birds. It turned out simply that I had not yet arrived

at the real haunt of the animals. Some time later I came there;

my heart leapt when I saw these creatures disporting them-
selves and I sat and primed my gun. Afterwards I rose, cut a

branch and stuck it in my mouth for camouflage and hid by
the bole of a tree, waiting. At the moment when I had a really

good chance to make a kill a singular being appeared, hardly
taller than my waist. He had a small mat under his arm and
wailed aloud. As he wailed tears fell from his eyes, his nostrils

dripped mucus and his lamentations drove the animals away.
At first I hoped his clamour would soon cease but he showed
no signs of stopping. He would weep for a while, then let

out a tremendous cry and all the animals would take to their

heels. After a while I could not bear it any longer, I came out
and faced him directly, saying in great anger, 'What a rotten

race you ghommids are, you who drip incessantly from the

nostrils! Just what precisely is the cause of your tragedy ? What
anyway does a thing like you want with a mat? If you don't
shut your mouth this instant I'll shoot you where you stand.'

He heard me to the end, then looked at me as if I mattered
less to him than a speck of dust. He eyed me meanly for a while

18



'

and then said, 'Even so do you children of earth behave, you
who have turned kindness sour to the charitable. We watch

you, you whose eyes do not stay long in one place, you who
chase emptiness all your life. Those who already boast a full

stomach continue to seek glorified positions, seek to live like

kings, forgetting that the fingers of the hand are unequal. And
it is also in your nature that your minds are never at peace;

those who find happiness today ensure that their neighbours

find no peace the day following; death today, tomorrow dis-

ease; war today, confusion tomorrow; tears today, tomorrow
sorrow—such is the common pursuit of you children of earth.

And when we think of your plight, we pity you, we weep for

you and drip at the nostrils, but instead of earning your affec-

tion, instead of you dancing to greet us and fussing over us,

you find even our mats a cause to despise us, our running

nostrils become your favourite target, you speak of our solici-

tude as a punishment, our existence as beneath contempt—even

to the extent that you have now coined the belittling expres-

sion, "Tears in the eye of a gnom."
Let me not lie to you, I was somewhat ashamed listening to

the words of this creature, for all his insults on mankind were
well observed. However, inasmuch as I did not want him to

realise how his words had hurt me deep inside, I burst out

laughing and assured him that I was only teasing him anyway.
He thereupon resumed his lamentations and went on his way.

He had taken a few steps when I thought to myself, 'A man
mends his fate with his own hands, why do I not crave a boon
from this creature?' So I called him back, prostrated myself

full length on the ground and begged him to grant me a boon.
He was very pleased that I had acted in this manner and he

gave me four pods of alligator pepper; he gave them to me in

two pairs and instructed me that in time of danger I should eat

a single pepper from one of the first pair of pods, whereupon
I would grow wings and fly like a bird. And the moment I

wished to retract the wings, one pepper from the other two

19



pods would produce the desired result. When I tried out this

formula, it proved a sure-fire treatment.

After he had passed on this gift, he went his way and I tur-

ned into the forest, seeking game. I walked some distance and
the animals leapt about while I sought my chance to take care-

ful aim. And yet again I came upon another abbreviated crea-

ture driving away the game. He was shorter still than the one I

had met before and his entire body was uncompromisingly
black. Once again I grew infuriated and spoke fiery words to

him: 'You are wicked creatures, you ghommids, pitiless as

well, and that is probably why your growth is stunted since you
are occupied with nothing but pointless acts. Game there is

and in abundance but you do not hunt it, yet you will not let

others alone to hunt.'

When I had thus berated him, he levelled me to the dust

with one long look, hissed in contempt and began to speak:

'I am the Crown Prince of Forests, the bog-troll who lives

in crevices of the mahogany. Have you never heard of me ?

Know you not that earthly beings dare not disrespect my per-

son ? That a mere son of man dare not affront my presence ?

It is lucky for you that I take pity on you or I would assuredly

reveal to you that this forest in which you hunt is indeed the

Forest of a Thousand Daemons. Diminutive though I appear, I

pursue the task which my Creator has assigned to me: I walk
the walk of the wise, I act with the nature of the discerning.

I never reach for that which my hand cannot encompass, nor

do I embark upon that which is beyond my power; I do not act

in the manner of the thoughtless, nor do I complete an action

which I then regret. I proceed along the course which I have set

for myself, and pursue the task I have set my hand upon since

the day of my creation by God the King. You arrogant crea-

tures, you who throw good money into the gutter, you tell

yourselves that you are buying clothes and waste your money
because of the superficial pleasures of life. You want to live

up to worldly expectations, so you attempt things which are

20



beyond your powers, you forget that the tongue of men is mere-

ly slick, that a man they malign today they are quite likely to

praise tomorrow. When a man makes an effort at something,

the sons of men sneer at him, but when success has crowned

his efforts they turn round and hail him. There is no one im-

mune from their calumny. They malign the poor and malign

the rich; they malign the common man and malign the famous:

when they feel like it they malign their king also. Therefore,

continue on your way, and I also will follow mine. I merely

go where my Creator has sent me.'

And thus he had his say and went his way. I was now tho-

roughly fed up with the whole business; every ghommid alike

appeared to use me ill. After this one had gone, I began to sense

the approach of game, leaping from tree to tree. Investigating,

I found it was a brown and white-patch monkey. A shot

bagged me the monkey, I tucked it in my bag, tossed it onto

my head, and, gun on shoulder, directed my legs to my rude

hunting-lodge at the base of the palm tree.

On arriving there, I took up my knife and skinned it,

built a little truss no higher than my knee, stacked a fire beneath,

piled my venison on top of it and fired it. That which I did

not pile on the truss, the scraps and tit-bits, I began to roast

in the fire, eating them on the spot. Highly enjoyable they

were too for the meat of the monkey oozes delicious juices.

Not long afterwards, it darkened, and towards the eighth

hour of the evening I lit my hunting-lamp and began to seek

game. I did not search very far before my eyes fastened on
another pair of eyes belonging to some creature, gleaming

a short way from me. I shot and killed it and it turned out to

be a civet. I took it to my camp, skinned and carved it, piled

the pieces beside the monkey and cracked the fire up at them.

I did not trouble to hunt any more that night, and when I had
tended the civet, I lowered my back to the earth and dropped
off to sleep, and it was not till the cooing of the cuckoo that

I awoke the following morning.

21





On the dawning of the next day therefore—and this was
the third day of my sojourn in the Forest of Irunmale—I ate,

filled up properly so that my belly protruberated most roundly.

I reached for my gun, primed it diligently, seized my hunting-

bag, slung it over my shoulder and so into the forest. It

grieves me to admit that I had out-eaten remembrance of

those charms which I should have taken with me. I left them
at the foot of the palm and took nothing but the shot for my
gun, and my cutlass.

I had not walked very far before I began to encounter

game, but they would not be patient and persisted in running

pointlessly about. And just when an opportunity presented

itself for a shot, I heard a rumble as of six hefty men approach-

ing; indeed, it was no less a monster than the sixteen-eyed

dewild ; often had I listened to hunters recount tales of him
Agbako, that is his name.
When I set eyes on him, I was—unless I lie in this matter

smitten with terror. He wore a cap of iron, a coat of brass,

and on his loins were leather shorts. His knees right down to

his feet appeared to be palm leaves; from his navel to the

bulge of his buttocks, metal network; and there was no
creature on earth which had not found a home in this netting

which even embraced a live snake among its links, darting

out its tongue as Agbako trod the earth.

His head was long and large, the sixteen eyes being arranged

around the base of his head, and there was no living man who
could stare into those eyes without trembling, they rolled

endlessly round like the face of a clock. His head was matted

with hair, black as the hearth and very long. Often swishing

his hips as he swung his legs, Agbako held two clubs in his

hand and three swords reposed in his sheath. A very evil

spirit was Agbako.
As soon as he spied me, he made my person his goal, tread-

ing the earth with purpose. And when I felt that he had come
•close enough, I ordered the road to seize him and it seized

22



him and cast him in the bush. But even as the road obeyed me,

so did it heave me also, and I found myself right in front of

Agbako. I was terrified and conjured earth to return me to

the road, and so it did. But even as I emerged on the road,

who should await me there but Agbako! This time I invoked
ogede and commanded the road to return him to the bush
where the ropes of the forest would bind him. And the road
obeyed and the forest bound him.

But just as he was flung into the bush even so I was served,

and I found myself face to face with him and the ropes began
to bind me. When the thongs began to strangle, I yelled on the

forest to release me and set me back on the road. It obeyed.

Needless to say, Agbako was there to welcome me. So, seeing

how things stood, I prepared for fight and we joined in a

death grapple. We fought for long but neither toppled the

other. We were smothered wholly in sweat, my eyes were
reddened and, as for Agbako, his eye-balls were as blood-

drops. The ground on which we fought shone like glazing.

Later, I tired, but not he. I untwined my arms but he held

fast to me. But when he perceived himself that I was too ex-

hausted, he released me. Dipping into his pouch, he brought
forth a gourdlet, and when he had walloped it hard, it turned

into a keg of palm-wine. Agbako sat him down and began
to serve me, and he refreshed himself also. When the keg of

palm-wine was depleted by half and I had rested somewhat,
he suggested that we had drunk enough and that we should

resume our strife. This we did forthwith.

We had been wrestling awhile when I retreated a little and
drew my cutlass and, even as he began to draw his, I slipped

behind him and slammed him one on the back of his head.

But it was my cutlass which broke in two, one half flirriting

off, while he wasn't dented one bit. Then he turned from me,
picked up the truant part of my weapon and, taking the stump
from me, joined them together so that the break vanished

completely and the cutlass was as before. And he said we

23



'I bulled into Agbako and seized him by the neck.'

24



;

should continue with the fight. And now I was truly exhausted

my breath came and went in rapid bloats like the hawing
of a toad. Just the same I continued the fight and, lifting my
cutlass, brought it down hard on his side. Before I could

retract the blow, he in turn slashed me on the sword-hand,

cutting it off cutlass and all. I followed my buttocks to the

ground, wallowing in the throes of death.

Even while I groaned in pain, Agbako again took my mis-

sing arm, fitted it on the stump, spat on his hand, and when
he had rubbed the spittle on the join, my arm returned to

normal and I could not believe that anything had happened
to it. Then he looked at me and, bursting into laughter,

declared that we must continue the contest. My terror was
now complete and I said to myself, E-ya! Is this not the cer-

tain approach of the end? So I cried aloud: 'Spirits of the

woods! Pilgrims of the road!—hasten to my rescue!'

And shortly after, every being in the Forest of Irunmale
came, the ghommids on one side, the birds on one side, the

animals separately, but Agbako gave no sign that he saw
anyone. He pulled me from the ground and we grappled anew.
If I swayed him he swayed me, if I threw him he threw me.
The fight was long and fierce. Every leaf was stilled and the

forest lulled in silence.

The ghommids had been watching us for a while when
I saw one of them detach himself from the rest and come to the

scene of struggle. He signed to Agbako to release me, and
Agbako complied. Then he offered me a slice of kola-nut

which I took and ate. And instantly a new vitality flooded
me and my strength became the strength of sixteen men. I bul-

led into Agbako and seized him by the neck, when I had
squeezed it hard he bellowed like a beast and all the ghommids
cheered.

But when I tried to lift him from the ground and smash
him in the fatal throw, his foot did not even turn aside;

firm he was as a lode in a crag. And he in turn strove to lift

25



my leg to his shoulder, slap off the other foot and paste my
marrow on the ground, but he failed in this and I stood robust-

ified. He fisted me and I felt it not, he kicked me but he did

not triumph; then he turned scorching hot from his head to

his toes, and the breath of his nostrils was like a violent storm.

And then it was that he slarruped sparks ablaze in my face,

proving to me that he was indeed Agbako the Master. He
thudded earth with his feet and the earth opened beneath

us and Agbako and I were sucked into the void.

When I arrived at the interior of earth, I found myself in

a strange house. Of Agbako there was no sign, and until my
return from this trip I did not set eyes on Agbako again.

Not until the day of our journey to Mount Langbodo was
I to encounter him again—you will hear about this later—but

what I experienced until my escape from the depths of earth

I will never forget in this lifetime, and when I am gone to

heaven I will remember it all, even there, for ever and ever.

The house in which I found myself was of modest size,

cowdung was used in plastering the floor and the walls also,

but the ceiling was lined entirely with guns. There was neither

window nor door, yet the house was full of light; where this

light came from remained a puzzle. I first discovered myself
right in the centre of the room, and even as I stood inspecting

my prison, I saw the four walls of the house coming towards
me, so that the room became progressively smaller as if the

walls planned to squeeze me to death. I was most afraid,

but when it lacked only a little for them to come to grips

with my body, they returned to their position and the house
was as before. And just as they regained this position and my
heart began to settle back, the armoury of the ceiling began
to fire, the house began to shake and I felt I was about to

fall; disorientation became my lot like the monologue of a

gnom. I stumbled here and there, fell, and settled on all

fours. I was in this position when my eyes went blind and I

felt hands begin to touch me: it was a very cold touch. After

26



a while these people began to dance round me, clapping their

hands above my head; I heard their footsteps distinctly, as

the footsteps of a hundred people. They did not stay doing

this for very long before they seized me and began to toss

me up, catch and toss me up again. Not long afterwards they

set my feet to the ground and began to undress me and place

different clothing on me, laughing all the while. Then one

rubbed his hand over my face and I regained my sight, but

when I looked round I saw no one; I found myself on a large

chair, my size was enormous and I was covered in feathers.

I had grown in size, but my entire body was not uniformly

increased; my arms had not changed, my legs had neither

lengthened nor thickened, but my belly was twelve times

distended and my head sixteen times its normal size. My neck

was not much thicker but was stretched beyond imagination.

I was highly amused when I beheld myself, and there was
no choice but to sit quietly. I did not rise for fear that my legs

would not support my stomach, for even as I sat my head
became a heavy burden on my neck; there was simply no
strength to the neck.

Some time went by and I began to feel hungry. Even as

I began to consider how I might find some way to a little

food, I saw in front of me two balls of eko and meat stew.

I tried to edge closer to start my meal but I soon discovered

that my stomach permitted no approach to the food; it had
taken up the entire room. As I began to manoeuvre towards
this food, I was astonished to see it come towards me, and
soon enough it settled where my hand could reach it. I took
a morsel and accompanied it mouthwards but, alas, I found
only then that my hand no longer came up to my mouth. My
neck was excessively elongated, it more resembled a heron's,

and its bone was hard as rock so that it could not be bent.

Anyone who wants a laugh should have come and seen me
struggling to lead some food into my mouth. Whenever it

lacked only little for the morsel to touch my lips the arm

27



would reach its limit, and when I tried forcibly to propel the

morsel to its destination oil flowed down my hands and my
neck was full of food crumbs.

Listen, my good friend, the soul which does not eat hot

peppers is a weak soul; I love food, I simply cannot endure

hunger. Because of this I was known to many people as

'Akara-ogun, the one who accompanies the cook to the

grave'. This nickname of mine will give you some idea how
my innermost being craved this food. Even as I continued

the struggle I saw a small flat stick nearby, reached gingerly

for it, dug it into the eko and began to convey some food to my
mouth. The quantity lifted by the stick was far larger than

my mouth could admit for my mouth had not increased its

former size, and when this huge lump of eko landed just inside

my lips it blocked my mouth entirely, and as I strove to eat

down the inside portion so as to attack the outside, that por-

tion fell away from my mouth. Even so did I vainly struggle,

and I could not enjoy my meal.

From the moment I began this effort to eat I had heard

voices laughing quite close to me, but I did not see anyone.

When I had done my best and eaten next to nothing, I cried

to them:
'You who laugh over there, I implore you in the name of

God, if it was you who changed me into what I am this mo-
ment, do not fail to return me to what I was before. It was

ignorance which led me to fight with Agbako; never again

will I attempt such folly. If I hear news of Agbako's approach

in future I will learn to start a rapid dialogue with my legs

and ram my head through forests. I appeal to you, kindly

release me.'

When I had spoken thus, they remained silent. After a

while, my stomach began to retract, my head diminished,

my neck shortened and soon every part returned to normal.

From the moment I returned to my normal shape I no lon-

ger heard a sound from these ghommids, but the house did

28



not cease to behave in its original manner, and, anyway,

I did not discover a means of escape. Some time passed to-

wards nightfall, and then I saw a wall of the house split in

two and a beautiful woman came in with a number of young
maidens, several of them and all more beautiful than coral.

I was smitten with fear at the sight of them and I threw

myself face downwards on the floor. But the woman came to

me and said:

'Akara-ogun, you are aware that even as dewilds exist

on this earth, so do spirits exist also; even as spirits exist so

also do kobolds; as kobolds on this earth, so are gnoms;
as gnoms so also exist the dead. These ghommids and trolls

together make up the entire thousand and one daemons who
exist upon earth. I am one of them, and Helpmeet is my name.

I love the Lord and he loves me also; he has never denied

me aught, nor have I ever failed to perform an errand on
which he has sent me. Thrice in one day I go through the

world to visit the friends of God and to assist them in all

their endeavours; whoever bears only a little love to Him,
I perform a little service for him; and he who loves my God
with a great love I care for in as great a proportion; whoever
acts with concern towards Him I treat with concern, and
whoever treats Him with disrespect even so do I act towards

him; for whoever sows well shall harvest goodness, and
whoever sows evil, evil shall come unto him. The truthful

shall not fail to profit good, the deceitful shall gain nothing

but deceit; even if it came to pass that the world turned

topsy-turvy, that fowls grew teeth and the oil palm grew
coconuts, God will not fail to reward every man according

to his deeds. So now, you Akara-ogun, rise and follow me,

for you are a most important instrument for your Creator.'

When she had finished, I rose and followed her, and we
emerged from this house into a certain bush and so continued

our progress. We traversed valleys and traversed hills; we
crept under creepers and waded through swamps. After a

29



while we arrived at a crossroads where she stopped and
showed me a route, saying:

'Go on now and pay attention to the things you shall wit-

ness in this city; never fear and be not cowed by terror, my
name is Helpmeet, I will never desert you on this earth.'

After which, I set my head along that road, and she also

went her way. I walked a little while and arrived at a certain

city. From my entry through the city gates until I arrived at

the market square—this was roughly ten minutes—I heard not

a single voice even though I encountered many people, and
when I called out greetings to them they would merely mumble
in their noses nor did I understand one word they mumbled.
When I arrived at their market I stood by a certain tree and
began to watch.

What amazed me most of all in this market was that many
children were dead in it yet no one made any attempt to bury

them. Corpses littered the place in prodigious numbers, the

entire market stank and flies swarmed over it with an incessant

buzz. I waited a little and then I saw a woman approach and
greet me. This made me happy and I responded eagerly; I then

went on to tell her how astonishing a matter I found it that

no one spoke at all among these market crowds, that they

should all merely mumble, and although 1 had greeted many of

them whom I encountered not one of them deigned to respond

to my greeting.

When I had had my say she looked at me and grew distress-

ed, saying:

'My name is Iwapele and the name of this city is Filth. It is a

place of suffering and contempt, a city of greed and contumely,

a city of envy and of thievery, a city of fights and wrangles, a

city of death and diseases—a veritable city of sinners. Once
upon a time, the people of this city committed a most atrocious

crime; a very evil deed it was—so evil that the sun did not

shine for six entire months, nor did the moon emerge for three

whole years; the rain fell no more and the corn did not come

30



to fruit, the yam did not sprout and plantains refused to ripen;

everything was in utter confusion. After a while, however,

God took pity on the inhabitants of the town; he remembered
that these people were after all his own creation; he forgave

them but warned them never to repeat their offences, and every-

thing returned to its previous good. But when they had again

eaten well and drunk to satisfaction, they forgot who made
them ; they began to walk in the path of their own choosing

and to act in any manner that pleased them. But their Maker
saw them from heaven, for all acts of mankind are observed

by God and there is nothing hidden from Him. Therefore

He sent his emissaries to enquire into the misdeeds of this city

of blood ; they came in the guise of men and they lodged at my
house. I took good care of them and honoured them; I wel-

comed them hands and feet, took such care of them as was
within my power. They did not stay long with me, only long

enough to deliver their message from the King of Heaven.

They turned the dwellers of this town into a race of the dumb
and punished them all with blindness; the city became a city

of curses for ever, but I was spared by God. Now that I have

set eyes on you I do not want you ever to depart from me.

I want you to dwell with me that I may hold converse with you
and you with me, for it is the company of the open that the

open keeps, it is the company of the masquerade that the mas-
querader seeks, the fish swims after the company of fishes in

the river; you are of my own kind.'

When she had finished I replied that I would do exactly as

she counselled for I was tired of so much aimless wandering.

But I sought her indulgence to stay a little and observe the

events in this market before we went on to her home. It was
only after her speech that I realised that these people were all

blind and dumb, and the factor which had made me unsus-

pecting was that their eyes were wide open as if they could see;

little did I know that the eyes which they carried about with

them were eyes of deceit.

31



Many, many things did my eyes behold but I will not state

them all now, I will recount them another day. Nevertheless

I will tell you a little of them lest it appear that I skip over this

episode entirely.

The first incident I saw concerned a certain man, a cripple,

who walked with the aid of a crutch. This man went very fast

and hopped about on his staff, and he soon bounded past me
in the direction of a pond. Seeing how close he was to it, I

cried a warning to him that his course was no thoroughfare but

he paid no heed. On arriving at the edge he leapt straight into

the pond. He was thoroughly soaked and I found myself full

of pity for him. But instead of distress, this man simply burst

into laughter; he emerged from the pond and continued his

mad dash all over the place. He had not hopped more than

three times when he leapt against a woman. This woman was

enraged but as she lifted her arm to strike the offending man,

it was a totally different person whom the arm encountered

and he in turn grew wrathful. He raised his hand in vengeance

but administered the punishment to yet another man. Before

long the fight spread to the entire market crowd and they began

to strike one another. As they rushed here and there several

babies fell off their mothers' backs and it was over their heads

that the combatants charged to meet one another. In the same
manner the aged among them who had little strength to prop

them up fell and could not rise, while the entire populace made
their bodies their thoroughfare. Often when a baby had fallen

down on the battleground and the mother stooped to pick it up,

instead of hers she picked up another's; some picked up dead

babies instead of their own living children, for God was full

of anger against them.

One other thing I observed was that many of them wore their

clothes inside out; some wore their agbada back to front, some
among the women wore their head-ties inside out; every gar-

ment shone with filth, it was more like the inside of a hunter's

bag.

32



Many sights did I witness in this market but they are far be-

yond what I can narrate at this time. When I had stayed awhile

and had seen enough I followed this woman to her home and
we began to live together.

I went often to their law courts. At times when a man had
committed an offence and they sought to punish him, the po-

liceman would seize one of the nobility, and before he dis-

covered the victim's true identity, would have served him many
slaps in rapid succession; at times when the king tried to mount
his horse he landed on a cow; even so did the affairs of these

people run higgledy-piggledy, topsy-turvy.

From the day of my arrival in this town there had been a

room in the house where I lived which the woman, my host,

would never allow me to enter. She had, shortly after my arri-

val, asked me never to go into that room as long as she was
alive, but that after her death I could do whatever I pleased

for the entire house would then be mine. The woman and I

loved each other greatly; it was a great love and I began to

consider seriously taking her to wife; and it was at this very

time that she was laid prostrate by a sudden illness, and in the

course of this illness that she died.

I had not thought that this woman would die before me, for

I was by far the elder; only when she had thus died did I ac-

knowledge that children and aged alike, none can escape the

hand of death. After her death I wept till I nearly went blind,

forgetting that weeping does not bring the dead back to life,

but only puts the living in peril. Let the wailer weep eternally

and the sighing sigh for ever, he who must cannot help his

going.

After the woman's death, I began to seek some way of escap-

ing from this town and, as I sat down one day thinking how I

should proceed, my mind went to the room which the woman
had forbidden me to enter. I rose from the ground, put on my
clothes and headed for this room as I wanted to see what it

contained. On the point of opening the door, I was at first

33



afraid, but when I recalled how much I had undergone in the

past I said to myself that I simply had to open it; whatever
would come of it, let it come: and so I threw it open. The very

instant I entered the room, I found myself in my own room at

home, and when I looked round I found my gun which I had
lost at the place where I did battle with Agbako; I found my
hunting-bag and a few other articles which I had lost in the

Forest of a Thousand Daemons and when I looked into the

corners of the room, I discovered a bag of money.
I spent this money in pleasures on myself, I ate, drank,

draped myself in decent clothing.

Thus ends the story of my first sojourn in this most terrifying

forest. I would now like you to find me a little food for

hunger is at hand. When I have done with eating I will lay my
tongue to the tale of my second journey, and that story is even

more delectable than the one that has gone before.

Even so did this man narrate the adventures of his first jour-

ney to the Forest of a Thousand Daemons. When his tale was
ended I brought him food and he ate, but I saw that night was
approaching, so I suggested that he retire for the day and re-

turn at break of the following day. I accompanied him some of

the way and we exchanged farewells, 'Till tomorrow.'

34



SECOND SOJOURN OF
AKARA-OGUN IN THE FOREST
OF A THOUSAND DAEMONS

When the man had departed and I had returned home I called

my neighbours together; I summoned friends and acquaint-

ances, sent for my relations also and recounted this affair to

them. They were greatly amazed and all resolved to wake
early the following morning before my stranger arrived, so

that they might themselves listen to the man's adventures, for

my re-telling could not aspire to their own participation. True
enough, sharp on the moment the new day began to break,

they began to arrive, and by the time that the man himself enter-

ed my house it was filled to overflowing and could hardly take

another pair of feet. Before dawn I had ordered my servants

to prepare food, and so before the stranger began his tale I

placed before my guests four baskets of eko and ladled meat
into dishes for them. Each and every man of us ate to satisfac-

tion and drank, after which the stranger rose and began to

speak as follows:

I am happy to see you all, friends, sitting here—young and
old, male and female. Were it not for the great affection you
bear my friend, I would not find you here. When I came yes-

terday I did not meet any one of you, there was only this friend

of mine. He bade me welcome, took good care of me, and be-

haved towards me with the nature of courtesy itself. My pray-

er therefore is, may God let this kind of conduct remain
among us black races for ever.

Without a doubt, my friend has told you the tale about
my parents, and about the various things which I experienced
when I visited the Forest of Irunmale. And I think I do not lie

35



when I say that anyone who has listened to these adventures
could not fail to believe that I would never dream of hunting
again. But no, I did hunt again, for it is in the profession to

which a man is trained that he must serve; the goods which he
truly understands are what a trader sells, and it was not fitting

that I should leave my profession at the prime of day and turn

to masonry or wood-carving. But certain it is also that, if you
learnt that I had indeed returned to hunting, you could hardly
imagine that I would return to the Forest of a Thousand Dae-
mons. I wish to let you know that it was to this very place that

I turned myself. He who must do what no one has done before

him will experience that which no man has experienced before.

No hunter makes a habit of exploring the Forest of Irunmale
as I did, no hunter undergoes such punishment as came to me.
I endured plenty; and even so should it be with me, for there

is truth in this saying of our elders—The aggressive man dies

the death of war, the swimmer dies the death of water, the

vainglorious dies the death of women; it is the trade of the

cutlass that breaks its teeth, the food we eat is what fills our
bellies—may God forbid that what you eat bring about your
death.

A clear year after my return from the first adventure, I once
again took hold of my gun one night and set my head on the

road to the Forest of Irunmale, all eager to do some hunting.

When I left home I had imagined that it was on the verge of

dawn, but the truth was that I had set out in the very dead of

night; the brilliant dawn-lingering phase of the moon had de-

ceived me into thinking that a new day was about to break.

However, by the time a man could begin to distinguish the

lines on his palm, it lacked only two hours for me to arrive at

my destination. It was a different route which I took to the For-

est this time. I did not wish to return the former way lest it ap-

pear that I sought out trouble with my own hands and met

the consequent misadventures, that I pulled the whirlwind

down on my own head.

36



I arrived finally just about breakfast time; quickly I made a

fire and roasted a piece of soft yam. My meal over I tucked my
pipe into my mouth and lit it; my body was filled with pleasure

and tingled all over with well-being. After a while I put out my
pipe and replaced it in my pocket. When I looked up I found

two kolanut trees, one had no fruits but the other had some.

I plucked the fruits of the latter and found three pods. When
I had split them all open the nuts numbered ten. I took the larg-

est of them and peeled it, its skin was wafer dry; I broke it

open and it pared in four. So, since this variety of kolanut is

excellent for ritual offering to the gun, I propped up my gun
and offered the kola. But when I cast the pieces, the result was
inauspicious. For if it spoke good, would two pieces not face

down and the other two up? Alas it was not so for me, some-
times three pieces faced down and one up, and at other times

all four faced down—the matter of this kolanut was simply

beyond my comprehension. So when I had cast them many
times without good augury, with my own hands I turned two
up and faced two down saying, 'With his own two hands does

a man mend his fortune; if you kola pieces will not predict

good, I will predict that good for you.' After I was done I picked

up my gun and proceeded to the forest of game.
Even as I stood up, I stubbed my left foot; this was my ma-

ternal foot and whenever I stumbled by this foot over any mat-

ter, that affair would not prosper. This frightened me some-
what, and while I stood pondering on this unlucky foot an owl
flew past and its wings hit me in the face; a most evil omen was
this. I stood for nearly ten minutes thinking about these omi-

nous signs but in the end I simply bartered death away saying,

'What of it! Does a man die more than once? If death must
take me then let me get on my way.' I plunged into this forest

and began to seek game. After a long while I saw an antelope,

with its haunches turned to me. I waited some time for the

creature to turn its head towards me but it did not oblige;

thereupon I loosed a shot at it. The animal was hit but the

37



shot was not lethal. It leapt into a zig-zag flight and I in turn
seized my cutlass and gun and chased it. I chased it over a long
distance but did not catch up with it; after a while it fled into a

cave within a large rock and I followed it inside.

The cave was large and exceedingly dark ; from the moment
I entered it I no longer saw the antelope, I could only follow
the thud of its hooves. But after a while there came the moment
when I neither saw the antelope nor heard its hooves. It puzz-
led me how it could have vanished in the middle of this place

and I began to hunt it everywhere. I was occupied with this

when I suddenly felt someone seize me by the right hand, twist

the arm behind my back and fetch me a slap on the ear. This
person's hand had a severe sting to it; even as I struggled to

free myself from his grip he used his left hand to grip me by
the neck and, when he had squeezed it tight, began to push
me forward with regular shoves, slapping me as we went along.

When, after some time, the punishment became unbearable I

began to cry out, 'Please let me go, I will never again touch
your antelope. Please, I will never again kill your game .

. . ' But
he made no reply; he continued to shove me along and pun-
ish me as he went. Sometimes he would pinch me, other times

he would rap me on the head; there was no variety of torment
he did not devise for me and I could not even see him because

it was pitch dark. It seemed a long time before we emerged
in the open, and only then did I observe the man; he was not

much above short and his back had an enormous hunch, fins

covered his body so that it had the appearance of a fish. He had
two arms, two legs, and two eyes like a human being, but he had
a small tail at his posterior and his eyes were enormous; each

one was six times the normal size and red as palm kernels.

When we came out into the open he ordered me to stoop and
place my hands on my knees and I obeyed him. When he ob-

served that I had done so he mounted my back, kicked me and

ordered me to bear him about as if I was a horse. Like it or

not I had to do this also. I want you to know that he had

38



seized my gun before we came out of the cave, and when he

was astride my back it was he who held on to it.

We emerged into tall grass and it was here that my torment

was most severe. Before he climbed on my back he had cut

several switches and kept them by him, and from the moment
he spurred me and turned my head in the direction of his

choice he began to laugh and to drip saliva on my head;

whenever I tried and sought to raise my head a little he would
lay about me with the whips and I would at once resume the

race. Sometimes he would ask me to neigh like a horse and
when my voice did not simulate a horse's satisfactorily he

would blast my ears with several slaps. Sometimes he demand-
ed that I toss him up and down like a horse, and there was
no remedy but to obey him; if I did not he would thrash the

very breath out of me. It was during these riding sessions that

we arrived at a spot where there was a large hole. He dis-

mounted and took a thick rope, tied my hands together behind

me, then entered deeper into this hole and returned with a

large chain which he hooked round my neck. He did not make
it too tight but slackened it a little so that I was able to breathe

comfortably. He then tied the chain to a tree and returned

into the cave; this was the home of the creature.

It would be about two o'clock when we came to this man's
dwelling, and when I saw that he was safely in, I took hold

of tears and began to weep them. I was careful to cry very

softly lest, overhearing me, he return to punish me even

more. About half past four, the man came out from the cave

and approached me; he pressed on my stomach to see if I

was hungry and when he observed that my stomach was
little better than flat he returned into the cave and brought

out a raw, uncooked yam. cut pieces into a leaf and placed it

before me. He put it down and told me to kneel and eat it

directly with my mouth. I tried a little of this yam but my
throat was not too favourable towards it, so I left the rest

alone. His next act was to loosen the chain from my neck,

39



'He mounted my back, kicked me and ordered me to bear^im
about as if I was a horse.'

40



untie my arms and mount again on my back, and I began to

bear him round and round in this bush. It was about seven

in the evening before we returned to his home and on our
return he himself ate some of the yam that I had left uneaten,

and I ate the rest. Afterwards he secured me as before, re-

entered the cave, and slept.

As you will surely realise, I did not sleep till daybreak.

I was full of doleful thoughts and frequently sobbed aloud.

The following morning my captor fed me on raw yams as

on the previous day and again I galloped him around till

nightfall of that day; at evening we returned to his cave

and once more he chained me by the neck to a tree, and when
he had fed me on raw yams, re-entered his home and slept.

You will be thinking by now that I ought somehow to have
freed myself during this length of time—and rightly too.

What made the situation so dismal was that he had seized

my gun from the moment of my capture and when he arrived

home he took it into the cave; he even took my hunting-bag

at the same time. And from the day that I came to that place,

he never allowed me to enter his home: whenever we returned

to the cave, it was the chain for me. I tried the few spells and
charms which I had left on my person but none of them had
any effect. I invoked, bullied and commanded ogede but

the matter seemed to have no solution.

Much later, however, I began to understand where I had
erred. I realised that I indulged in magical arts but had failed

to reckon with God. I forgot that He created the leaf and
created the bark of the tree. Before daylight broke on my
third day I cried to God and prayed:

'Ruler of skies, Owner of this day, this matter is much
beyond me. Help me now, help me for I cannot do it by myself

alone. O God, do assist me in this. Forbid it that I become
meat for this creature; forbid it that he use my skull for a

bugle. Let me not perish in this forest; forbid it that from this

spot I become a voyager to heaven: let me not die the death

41



of a fowl ; forbid it that this man devour me as a cat devours
mice. Let the masquerader worship the mask for as long as he
pleases, he must return to render account to you; let the

follower of Sango serve and serve Sango, he must render

account to you; let the devotee of Oya bow to Oya, he must
return in the end to you and render accounts. The Moslems
worship you as Anabi, the Christians offer you every minute

of their existence. I implore you rescue me, I cannot alone

save myself, God Almighty, save me from my plight!'

Even so did I pray that night and I rested my hopes in God.
The following morning when the man emerged as usual and
offered me the usual raw yams, I was inspired by God to ask

him a small question.

'Pardon me, Master, I beg of you, do not fail to tell me why
it is that you do not cook your yam before you eat it.'

He looked at me with wide-mouthed astonishment and

confessed that he was not aware that there was such a thing

as went by the name of cooked yam. So I elaborated further

on it, saying that when yam is cooked it is far more delicious

than when it is eaten raw. So he asked me if perchance I

could cook this yam for him and, when I answered yes, he

unchained me. I made a fire and cooked the yam, and when
it was done I peeled and offered it to him. When he tasted

this yam it tickled his palate no end and he began to talk

to me with interest.

As we were speaking thus we touched on the subject of

the gun and he demanded to know what was the use of it.

I replied at once that it was a gadget for enjoyment, and that

if I thrust the muzzle of this gun in the mouth of anyone and

gently caressed its stock at the base, water would flow from

the gun of such a quality that the man would experience no

thirst for seven clear days. When he heard this he hurried

into the cave and brought out my weapon, eagerly he thrust

the muzzle in his mouth and bade me caress it at the base.

The bird is already eager to fly and idle hands pelt it with

42



—

stones—this was exactly how the matter was. I took the gun
in my hand, blazed away and heard it roar. Down fell the

man, dead.

Even so did I bring about the end of this man, but I must
rejoice no further, for I had not the least idea where I was.

But first, after I had despatched him, I entered the cave, and
when I was deep inside I discovered all manner of precious

things segi, coral beads, waist beads and expensive cloths

such as velvet, sanyan, red northern, dyed cloth and exqui-

sitely seasoned kijipa which had been smoothly beaten. And
I discovered various kinds of headgear, okiribi, dog-ears and
plain hats. I found also three crowns which were made of

beads; if a king put these on, his face would be invisible, for

these beads hung down right round the crown; they were
beautiful beyond words. I found a stack of yams also, and
took some which I cooked. After this I selected the most
valuable of these treasures, packed them properly, took my
gun and my hunting-bag and began to feel my way around
until I could arrive at a familiar spot and head for home. But

rather than soften, the fronds of the coconut palm merely

stood stiffer. The more I sought a way out, the deeper I was
lost.

After some time I began to hear the sound of drumming
from the spiked grassland and I turned in the direction of the

drums. Before long I came upon a settlement; it was a city

of ghommids. These were different from the usual run of

ghommids; they were just like human beings and both male

and female were attractively attired; they were like birds of

elegant plumage. On the day of my arrival the crown prince

of the town was holding a celebration and the entire populace

were gathered in the market square; their king was seated

on his throne watching his son dance on horseback. When
I first came there they were all engaged in dancing round the

prince; they were so immersed in their dance that they did

not observe me, but their king had seen me from the first and

43



had instructed someone who stood close to him to summon
me to him. I went, and when I was close to him and saw that

he was a king, I prostrated myself full-length on the ground,

poured earth on my head, and saluted him 'Kabiyesi!'

He thereupon told me to rise, turned to me and spoke thus:

'There are many ghommids upon this earth who hate the sons

of men. They frighten them by day and chase them about
at night, they indulge in the habit of taunting them and they

talk of them with contempt; but I disapprove of such ghom-
mids and love to make friends with human beings, for there

is wisdom in them. Therefore I want you to put down your
load, sit at my feet and enjoy the festival.'

I was truly happy to hear this from the king and as 1 sat

down I observed that the drummers were not really perform-

ing too well, so I sought permission from the king to take over

from them and he granted my wish. He called the lead drum-
mer and told him to give me a drum and bid the others keep

silent a while; I was then handed a gangan.

A long time before while still a child I had learnt how to

drum; whenever I did not accompany my father on his

hunting trips, I would follow round after a certain relation of

mine whose profession was drumming. This gave me greater

honour among these ghommids; I took the drum and set

to work and all of them began to dance. My good friends,

these ghommids most assuredly could dance; they danced
better than grubs. When I had truly excelled myself, the king

himself rose from the throne and plunged into the dance.

I was now thoroughly aroused and I dug the crook into the

drum skin, darted into the fray and crowded the king with

music.

It was a long while before the dancing stopped, and the

king took me to his palace and placed delicious dishes before

me. When I had dined he made me a gift of a house, boy
servants and maidservants to live with me and insisted that

I make their city my home; but should I wish to return to my
44



home to look up my own people, he would provide those

who would accompany me so that it would be as if I merely
visited there as a stranger and would return immediately.

His words sounded good to my ears and I accepted.

I stayed very long in this town and I enjoyed myself beyond
measure. The king loved me more than life; everyday he
sought new ways of diverting me, he indulged me and con-

tented me and treated me truly as a son. Even so did many
of the townspeople extend favours to me, they also loved me
like a paramour. As for me, I had resolved within myself

to render satisfaction to them all even in so far as it lay within

my power. There was nothing which any one of them would
request of me which met with a denial; there was nowhere the

king would send me that I would not go: it was much as if

we were all children of the same mother.

But no matter how numerous are a man's wives, he will

not fail to have a favourite among them. I had a friend in this

town who grew closer to me than the rest of them; he was
a man of great fame and possessed a great deal of influence

in that town. And it so happened one day that my friend came
to me and said, 'Akara-ogun, would you ever guess that the

people of this town plan to kill the king? It is painful to have

to tell you that they have plotted this thing, that they have

even conspired with a favourite wife of the king how they

will achieve their aim. This woman has been given a kolanut

which she is to offer to the king, and it is most certain that if

the king eats the kolanut, he will die an instant death. These

citizens have been at the matter a long time and it was only

last night that they took a decision on it; I had to come at

once and tell you about it.'

I was greatly frightened to hear this and I went to the king

and told him everything. He very nearly refused outright to

believe me for he had placed absolute trust in this woman.
But in the end, he agreed that when the woman offered him
the kolanut, he would not eat it but hide it carefully.

45



The following morning after the king and his wives had
eaten, his woman hailed the king and said, 'Kabiyesi, there

is a little matter I forgot to mention yesterday. 1 visited with

another of your wives a friend of yours and he made us a

present of four kolanuts. We shared them between us, and
my portion came to two. As you know very well I cannot eat

anything and ignore you, so I kept yours wrapped in a leaf

when I ate mine. I even meant to give it to you yesterday but

it escaped my mind. But that is just as well, for this kolanut
is especially good for a snack after the kind of meal you have
just eaten — here it is now my lord and husband, kindly

accept it for what it is worth.' When she had finished she

placed the kolanut in the king's hand, but instead of eating

it he hid it carefully and pretended that he had eaten it.

The day passed but the king did not suffer stomach ache nor

did any harm befall him. A new day dawned, yet he woke in

good health, and moment by moment a week passed and the

king remained fit as solid rock. So after a while the conspir-

ators met again and sent for the wife; they asked her how
it was that matters stood thus and when she had recounted

how she performed her part towards the king, she said:

'You must not imagine that I deceived you at all, I want
you to know most assuredly that there is no way in which
I have benefited from this man from the day that he claimed

to be courting me. Is it not true that anyone who sees me in

the streets will imagine that it is he who takes such care of

me? A lie! rich as he is he cannot spend a halfpenny for the

good of another being. Let us thank the shoulder but for

whose aid the garment would fall off the body; it is thanks to

my mother that hunger has not plucked out my eyes. But
for my mother I would be walking through the town centre

and flies would swarm on me and dogs bark at me. He is

meaner than the dog who vomits his food and returns to eat

it. Observe him carefully enough and you will discover that

the man is exceedingly vain; when he has finally persuaded

46



himself to visit some other kingdom and observes how the

king's wives bear themselves in other parts he returns home
and begins to make his pathetic efforts, persuading himself

that he actually wants to make a new outfit for this wife.

Abominated head, pachydermous neck, there is no remedy
but that you must kill him. And here is the way to be rid of

him. It is only a small matter—late tonight when everyone

is asleep I will go and open up the palace gates; appoint four

muscular thugs and let them enter sword in hand; whatever

room you notice with open windows, enter, for there the

king will be. Whoever you find within it, give him his death.'

So counselled this woman in conspiracy with the towns-

people; she denied her husband because of money. May God
in his Mercy not leave you men to encounter such a woman.
The house where I lived was within the palace and it took

some time before news of this new intrigue of the townspeople

came to my ears, but the moment I heard I rose and went
to the king's quarters. When I arrived at the backyard directly

opposite the room where the king and this evil woman nor-

mally slept. I sat on the ground and watched to see if before

long a window would open. Sure enough before I had sat for

a while I saw the woman open a window, in fact it missed my
head by very little. After this she opened the door leading to

this room and proceeded to open several doors along the

route to the gates. As she acted thus, I watched her, and when
I knew that she must have passed through all the doors to the

gates of the palace enclosure I quickly went into the king's

bedroom, woke him up and took him by the hand. As soon
as he looked at me and recognised me he wanted to say some-
thing, but I waved him into silence and led him out, took him
to my bedroom and told him to sleep there. Then I returned

to his room and shut the window.
Not long afterwards the woman returned and went to an-

other room to sleep. I waited some time until she began to

snore, then opened her window and went my way. But not yet

47



—

to my house; I went and sat in a certain alcove which opened
out from one of the palace buildings, from where I could see

clearly into the compound. Hardly had I sat when I observed
the four appointed men enter sword in hand; they followed

their course towards the house of the king and I rose softly and
sneaked after them. As soon as they saw the open window
they leapt into the room and—before a bird's touch-down
they had slain this woman and cut her up in small pieces in the

belief that this was the end of the king. They lied in their teeth:

to him who casts ashes, the ashes must return; whoever invites

trouble, trouble seeks him out; whoever calls on contention,

contention will answer to his call; evil cannot fail but end a

heart of evil. Thus did this woman die the death of a dog and
rot like bananas: even thus did the King of Heaven raise this

righteous king in triumph above their schemes.

The king was thoroughly mystified by my actions and it was
not until the following morning that I explained it all to him.

When he heard it he was greatly frightened, he rendered praises

to God and he thanked me most fervently. After this incident

I asked him to go and inspect the kolanut wherever it was,

which the woman had given him that other time. He found it,

it had turned to a foul egg, blotchily bloated. Had the king

eaten that kolanut, even so would he have swollen round his

stomach like a yam tuber.

So did God rescue the king from the second danger, but

his enemies had prepared yet another for him.

There was a most vicious beast in this kingdom; it was a

one-eyed leopard. He menaced the townspeople at will and
preyed on them as he pleased and, no matter how hard

they tried to kill him, the effort proved futile. Eventually the

entire town met in assembly and summoned the priests of Ifa

with whom they conspired that the entire priesthood of the

Oracle should go to the king and bid him send a crier to sum-
mon the population to the market square. The crier would
announce that the priests had a message to deliver which had

48



come directly from the lips of the clan-spirits, so that when the

king had obeyed and the entire people were assembled, the

Head Priest would address them all in the following words:

'Rest well you people of our town; it is upon this matter of

the one-eyed leopard that we have summoned you here to

speak and deliberate with you. The guardian spirits advised

us recently that the only way to stop the menace of this beast is

to call you all together and let us voluntarily select one man
among you as an offering to this beast—the significance being

that this individual takes away from us the sins of the entire

city—also that the person so selected must volunteer himself

for we must not enforce this on anyone. The spirits said fur-

ther that if we cannot find anyone among you to sacrifice him-

self for others in this manner, whether we like it or not we must
make a gift of our king to the beast. Should we fail to do this,

instead of the one beast we shall be plagued with seven such

creatures, each one surmounted by at hundred horns. This is

the problem which we would like you all to consider carefully.'

It is true that these people planned a great treachery and
embarked on a great conspiracy; but they forgot that he

whom God himself does not apprehend, no man can harm
him. Do you not see the nature of the words which these men
had placed on the tongue of the Head Priest? They knew very

well that there was no way in which the king could escape;

for clear it was that none of them had set eyes on any guar-

dian spirit, and there would be none who would rise and walk

into a pointless death. And the entire city was present when
this plot was hatched, so it left only me, and the king, only a

wife of the king, two children of the king and a servant.

So the priesthood came to the king and addressed him as

planned, and the king obeyed them without any suspicion; he

summoned a town assembly.

When they were all seated the Head Priest rose and spoke as

the people had schooled him. As he ended his set piece he en-

quired if anyone there was prepared to make himself a gift to

49



:

death but no one rose; they stared blankly at one another. In

the end the king rose and said that since there was no one pres-

ent who would respond with a proud breast to the matter in

hand, he was quite ready to go and provide the beast's next

dinner. With great rejoicing the people gave a shout of

approval, they began to offer their thanks of hypocrisy to the

king.

I waited patiently for the king to have his say, and as he sat

down I rose and addressed them thus

'Kabiyesi, you will die no such death. I here will take your
place, and I am all ready to go.'

Upon this the king looked at me and buist into tears. He
begged me not to go but my mind was made up. He pleaded a

long time but I said, 'Come rain come thunder I shall go.' My
will was fully aroused and all his words simply by-passed my
ears. I rose from the ground like air and told the ghommids to

lead me to the dwelling of the beast where I would meet my
death. Thus did they all follow me with great anger, there was
no sympathy for me because, they claimed, I had brought it all

on myself. Before we left, I sent home for my matchet and my
thin, double-edged dagger. These were brought to me, and so,

accompanied by dagger and matchet, I set off. But these

ghommids only laughed and scoffed at me because even more
valiant efforts than mine had failed to kill this manner of beast,

according to their thinking.

Soon we arrived at the cave; it was a big cave and lay within

an enormous rock. As I got there, I drew my matchet, gripped

my dagger, tautened my trouser band, and uttered a spell that

the tiger's claws be sheathed. I then entered the cave and began
to seek him everywhere; suie enough my spell had worked, the

creature's claws were drawn in even before I encountered him.

As soon as he spied me he homed on me without deviation, and
pounded towards me. And even though it was true that I felt

terror at the sight of him, yet was I determined to show him a

thing or two before he eventually killed and devoured me; in

50



my hand my knife was tightly held. When he was only a short

distance away he leapt upon me as a hawk might dive on a

chicken but I stood firm, because even before he leapt I had
resolved to blind him and I had set the dagger at the target of

his eye—this very leap took his eye smack on the point of the

knife which was driven in to the hilt. After this I retreated a

little but he was surely blinded and, as the venom of the knife

seeped further into his body, he rampaged around desperate to

find me, and if he had encountered me in that state it would
have been a sorry tale indeed. When I saw that he had begun
to tire a little, I drew near to him and seized him by the neck

in an attempt to twist his neck backwards, force his back to

the ground and stab him in the soft of his belly with my dagger,

but he easily tossed me off and I hit a rock on my back. At
once he dashed forward hoping to catch me where I had fallen,

but I was in a different spot. I did not stay down too long be-

cause I saw that he had tired even more, so I made the effort

to rise, seized my matchet and tip-toed towards him; when I

had moved within reach I gathered all my strength and struck

him on the neck. The blade penetrated him a little and, before

he could turn round, I seized hold of him and we began wres-

tling in earnest. We wrestled for a long time and threw each

other many times, but in the end he fled, so I hung on to him,

tucking my matchet in my trousers while the beast dragged me
along with him. He pulled me about for some five minutes

before he tired completely and stood still, panting heavily.

When I observed this I seized him about the wound on his

neck and pulled him back with all my strength; he fell on
his neck and before he could crawl back to his feet I struck him
a death blow and his intestines splashed out of his stomach.

Even so did I overcome this evil beast.

Now it was one thing to kill him, it was another to carry

him out of there; and yet it was clear that if I did not bring

him from the cave my glory would not be apparent to the

world. When I seized him by the legs and applied all my strength

51



to drag him out, he merely settled back in position, he was
much too enormous. At first I was afraid and began to doubt
whether I would fail in this task, but the more I thought about
it, the more I was convinced that I must make every effort be-

fore I gave it up. So I sat gently down and rested a while.

When I had rested, I took both my matchet and my knife and
tucked them out of the way in my trouser band ; I seized the

beast by the legs and began to drag it out. My friends, it did

not seem possible, but I dragged that monster out. As I re-

emerged into sunlight I set on the road to the town and drag-

ged it along, by six o'clock in the evening I appeared in the

town and shouts of wonder re-echoed among the people. They
stared at me with open-mouthed amazement.

Since my departure the king had not stopped weeping for he

thought I must surely be dead. Those who had accompanied
me to the cave were also convinced that I was dead, for when
I entered the cave and they had waited a little without my re-

turning, they went back home and announced to the people

that I had met my due.

You can, my friends, yourselves imagine the overflow of joy

in the king when he set eyes on me. His happiness was inde-

scribable, and from then on I became a dearer friend and be-

came so great a confidant of the king that he would embark
on nothing without letting me know. My word in that king-

dom was law. But when the stunted palm begins to grow the

forest giant bursts with resentment—this was my fortune ; my
relationship with the king did not please the majority of them
and they sought ways of setting us at loggerheads. They be-

gan to vilify me before the king, they lied and lied, they

plotted and plotted but he paid no heed to them.

It so happened that the king owned a dog, a unique dog it

was, with teeth of pure gold and fur of bronze. It was a gift

from Sokoti the Smith of Heaven to the king on his coronation.

The king was deeply attached to this dog and often swore that

if anyone harmed the dog and he found him out, he would hand

52



the culprit to the youths of the town to devise for him the worst

punishment they could think of.

From the moment that I began to live in the town I had
looked after this dog and protected him from possible mal-

treatment; he grew to know my face very well. But one day I

missed the dog. I went to the king and asked him if he had
seen it, he said no. Both the king and I searched for a long time

but to no avail. In the end the king sent out a crier for the people

to assemble; soon they were all gathered in the market place,

the king among them, seated on his throne, and I on the right

side of him relishing my closeness to him. He began to speak

and told them how it was a great sorrow to him that the dog
which was a present from Sokoti the Smith of Heaven to mark
his coronation, should be lost, and that both he and I had
searched everywhere but without success. And he begged the

townspeople for their help in tracing the dog.

He had hardly finished when a man rose and said: 'Kabiyesi,

noble king, may God grant you a long life, may the King of
Heaven forbid that you die an unexpected death, may your
Creator never let sickness pin you to the ground, may the

King whose Word is Law protect you from the enemy within

and the enemy without. The watercress floats above water, the

water lettuce surmounts the pool, you will always triumph
over your enemy; the prop of the rodent snare always falls

forward, your hand will always move forward; no one sees the

end of the ocean, no one can see the end of the seas, no one will

witness the end of the skies; those who will surely be destroy-

ed by their own envy cannot see the end of you—never!

I thank you greatly for bringing this matter before the people.

Surely there is no one who knows what that dog meant to you
who would not grieve for you, and there is one thing which I

I want the entire people to know—this dog was stolen, and
the thief is one who is quite close to the king. It is my opinion
that, if the matter is to be properly pursued, we must investi-

gate the man who first informed the king about the missing

53



:

dog. It is this man we must insist should find the dog because

he was the first to know it was missing, and he alone can tell

in which place it lost itself. Live long, live honoured.'

As soon as he ceased another rose and gave support and
encouragement to the opinion of the first man, saying that the

man who first informed the king would need close question-

ing—this man being me.

The third man who rose to speak was my bosom friend, he

who in former times would reveal their secrets to me; be began
to speak, and his words went thus

'I greet you all, people of this town. I greet you in your de-

liberations, may God grant that this manner of thing does not

bring us together too often. Howu! The witch howled last

night, the child died today, who then does not know that the

witch it was who ate up the child! Who here does not know
that Akara-ogun stole this very dog! Well, look at me, am I

not his bosom friend? He has planned this thing for a long

time and he finally fulfilled his aim two nights ago. I warned
him but to no avail—he is a truly hardened thief. And my
own counsel in this matter is that this town must deal with him
as he deserves, for he is a most evil-headed man : as for me, it is

clear that I must break off our friendship from here on, lest he

bring his own ill consequences onto me.' When he had spoken
thus he turned to face me saying, 'Ah, so this is the face of a

thief! When I warned you to desist from stealing did you lis-

ten? When I told you to quit loose talk did you leave gossip

alone? When I counselled you to desist from acts of envy, did

you desist? You who arrived here like a slave, the moment you
felt secure you began to play nobility, toadying up to a king

not your own. Do you not know that disgrace must be the end

of the excessive and that every day might seem to belong to the

robber but one single day is the day of the owner? You who
enter a strange town without first observing its custom; day-

light has caught you unawares, the king must fulfil his pro-

mise and hand you over to the youths for punishment.'

54



My friends, I trembled to hear the words of this man, and

when I opened my lips to reply it was only tears that fell, for

populous as this town was it was only this man whom I loved

before all else. We came home together and our outings were

together and whatever he spoke about me deserved to be be-

lieved, yet, every word he had just uttered was nothing but

calumny against me.

Eventually, I did find my tongue and began to speak. 'In-

deed, the truthful are no more and there is none of them to be

found; there are few men left under the heavens in whom an-

other may trust. To ward off contempt I had eight hundred

friends so that if four hundred decried me, four hundred would
praise me. Ah, you who are my companion at drink and com-
panion at table, do you join with others in plotting this trea-

chery against me ? Indeed, I can hardly blame you. It was I who
summoned war and found war, it was I who summoned trea-

chery and found treachery, it was I who with my own hands

pulled stinging nettles close to me, it was I who took a per-

fidious man for friend, who invited a robber to rob me, who
placed shoes on the feet of a country bumpkin. But, the but-

terfly which rams a thornbush soon finds that its own clothes

have met disaster, whoever acts evil will certainly fall by

evil—before I die this day, I will first grant you your own de-

serving.'

Even as I spoke, my thin pointed dagger was in my waist-

band; as I stopped speaking, I drew it out and stabbed him to

death. And when I observed that the elders of this town began

to rage at my action, I went in their midst and stabbed them
also and killed them, sparing only the king.

After this I ordered the youths to bury them, but the earth

turned to stone and refused to take their corpses, for theirs

was a death in sin. So I again ordered that their bodies be cast

into the sea but the sea refused them and threw them back on
land. And I told them next to place these bodies on trees but

the trees dodged them. Even as they fell back towards earth,

55



a chain descended from heaven and tied them up, leaving them
high up in the air. And there they stayed until they began to rot,

the birds of the air flew down on them, excreted on their heads

and pecked at them.

All these acts, however, only incensed the youths further

but, because of the approach of night, they did nothing to me
but returned to their homes and I to mine.

I woke very late the following day, the sun was already up.

As I rose from my mat and made to saunter out, I saw a nu-

merous crowd of people armed with cudgels and cutlasses,

coming in my direction. It did not even occur to me that it was

I whom they were seeking, I had no suspicion at all until they

were actually upon me. I had only a coverlet around me, and
before I could enter the house to put on some clothes they had

seized me. In a second my arms were tightly bound behind my
back; next they entered the house and brought out all my valu-

ables, both those which I had acquired in this town and those

which I owned before I came there; they tied them in bundles

and placed them on the heads of children. I was taken through

the market and whipped as we went; my body was raw and full

of weals.

When we got to the market, they ordered me into a hole

which had been dug in expectation of me. I obeyed and found

that it came up to my neck; only my head appeared above

ground. They made me stand straight and then began to fill

up the hole, pounding the earth hard against my body. Next

they took up a matchet and began to shave off my hair. When
it looked clean enough they poured honey over my head so that

flies of all kinds buzzed round it in swarms. They proceeded

to spread my goods all around me, placed all kinds of food
—

before me and an inscription on a signpost which read 'With

your eyes behold this, but your lips will not touch.' They tor-

mented me in every conceivable manner; I wept until tears

were exhausted in the home of tears, I pleaded until pleas were

finished in the home of pleas, but the seasoned witch, sooner

56



:

than experience a change of fortune, simply gives birth to

daughter after daughter, so witchbird swarms over witchbird

instead of taking pity on me they redoubled their jeers. In the

end they all left me to my fate and went their ways.

At this stage I had resigned myself to death ; certainly I had
no hope that I would ever escape from my present plight.

But God had seen their act of wickedness and resolved in his

mind to rescue me. They buried me about half past eleven in

the morning; about two o'clock the clouds began to gather

and before long it began to rain. The rain was truly heavy

and did not cease until about eight o'clock at night. As you
will realize, it was upon my head the rain began and on my
head also did it stop, but even though this heavy storm pun-

ished me it had also been helpful to me in one respect. For I

realised after it was over that the soil had softened a great

deal, and I moved myself about to see if I might extract myself.

I saw indeed that if I applied some effort I could climb out,

and after some struggle and some time, I did. Quickly I took

a few of the more valuable among my possessions; I ate a
little of the food, picked up my things and fled into the night.

My condition, which was a tired one, made my feet rather

infirm on the ground, so after I had walked sometime and
arrived at a certain pit, I went down into it. This turned out

to be the pit which was used by the townspeople for disposing

of their dead livestock, for they would never eat an animal

which had died on its own. This gave the pit an unholy stench

and I was no sooner down it than I stepped on the festering

head of some such animal. Backwards or forwards I could not

find a patch of common earth, the place was filled with the

carcasses of animals. So I reached down on a goat that appear-

ed freshly deposited and attempted to sit on it, little dreaming
that it was at least four days dead and its seeming firmness

simply bloatedness. The moment my buttocks hit the carcass,

it burst, and the gall bladder and intestines flushed my but-

tocks with their fetid fluids.

57



When I thought upon these new tribulations, helpless

tears flooded me. At that moment even death seemed pre-

ferable to life. But my Creator again took pity on me and sent

a messenger to me; it was a most beautiful woman, and when
she came to me she took me by the hand and bade me follow

her. Still weeping I followed, and after we had walked some
distance in this pit we came to a certain well-appointed house.

Several boys and maidservants were in this house, and each

of them more beautiful than the antelope. It turned out that

this woman was the head of the household. As we stepped in

she ordered the servants to bathe me in warm water and rub

me in sweet-smelling unguents. After this she gave me a velvet

coverlet and placed the most delicious food before me. When
I had eaten I rose and would have prostrated myself to her

because of excessive joy at my situation, but she forbade it.

Next she showed me to a room and pointed to a bed where

she told me I should sleep. My head was no sooner down than

I slept off, and it was not until the afternoon of the following

day that I awoke. She woke me up, inviting me to eat.

This woman again took such care of me the following

day that I nearly resolved that there was nowhere better to

hunt than the Forest of a Thousand Daemons. The drunkard

had forgotten toil, I forgot all the suffering I had undergone.

And her hospitality on the third day was simply indescribable.

On the evening of the third day the woman complained
of a headache, so I sat beside her, took her head in my hands
and began some incantations for its cure. My good compa-
nions, it was even as I uttered these healing words that the

woman died in my hands, and, as she died, a bell rang and
all the members of her household came towards me and died

there about us. I thereupon endeavoured to die also but this

proved impossible and I said to myself, what new visitation

is this? I could not sleep all night, I alone living among all

the dead—I was terrified of them. Early the following morn-
ing I cried up to my mother and bade her come out of heaven

58



and attend me where I stood. I called her the first time but

there was no response, I called her a second time and still

I heard nothing, the third time I bellowed out in anguish

saying:

'Ah Mother! Mother! Mother! Why do you fail to answer

me at this hour? Why do I detect no sound of your presence?

Is death not preferable to scorn for me ? Had I but died at home,
that would have been much better than this present plight.

Is it fitting that I should perish in this wilderness? Is it prop-

er that no one should know what earth covers me? This

world favours me ill; I emerge from the home of death to

the home of illness, I go from torment to contempt, my life

proceeds lacking head or tail. Mother, dear mother, true

mother, most complete mother, mother who turned out well

in life, sharper than sharp mother, mother to be reckoned

with, larger-than-life mother, far from wicked mother, an
elite-on-earth mother, a famous-in-heaven mother, mother
who dined well on earth, mother who wines well in heaven.

Ah, you invaluable mother, wherever you are this day, do not

fail to let my eyes behold you.'

When I had cried out thus, the earth was rent suddenly

open and my mother appeared, and seeing me with tears in

my eyes she also began to cry. She embraced me, caressed

me on the head, saying. 'Why do you summon me thus, my
child? Tell me, do tell me, I want you to tell me, my son.

I know that in this world your portion is hardship for you
are a valiant man among men and a famous figure in the world.

God will not deny you a long life, your Creator will not hide

riches from your reach; but try, try to benefit this world
before you die and leave it better than you entered it. As
for returning home, that you surely will, nor will you die in

the prime of youth. And also, when you have become aged,

life will hold you esteemed, for there is nothing more har-

rowing under the heavens than the sight of an elder who is

not yet free from toil. Therefore tell me if it is on an important

59



matter that you have thus summoned me so that I may exert

myself for you and make you happy.'

When my mother stopped, I wiped off my tears and told

her that it was the fear that I could not escape from where
I was which made me cry to her, and I told her also of the

number of cruel experiences I had undergone. After this she

brought out a tasty cake which she offered me and I ate it.

Then she bade me follow her and I followed her. We did

not walk too far before we came to a tunnel. There she dug
her hand in her pocket and brought out a stone; this stone

was very smooth and was white as cotton fluff. She instructed

me to throw this stone into the tunnel and follow it wherever
it rolled. And she assured me that if I did so I would emerge
before long in a different section of the forest where I would
meet another hunter who had been lost for a very long time.

And she promised further that I would not encounter too many
hardships from that moment until my return home. When
she had said this, the earth yawned again and swallowed
her, and I did as she had instructed me.

AKARA-OGUN AND LAMORIN

I walked through this tunnel for about an hour before I

emerged into the light, and I picked up the stone and kept

it in my hunting bag—since the beginning of my recent hard-

ships I had stuck close to my gun and my hunting-bag. No
sooner was I out than I encountered a man whose name was
Lamorin; this man had been lost in the deep jungle for the

past three years.

When he set eyes on me he rejoiced right down to his

deepest marrow for we were neighbours in my hometown.
We exchanged affectionate greetings and we exchanged tales

of our adventures—my own experiences were nothing com-

60



pared to those of Lamorin, for it was a long time indeed

since he had been lost, or last set his eyes on his home.

We journeyed together and arrived at a certain river.

As we went along the bank of the river we saw a giant of a

man before us; he carried a huge bag over his arm and was

stark naked. In his hand he held the head of a lion which

he chewed as he walked and, as he caught sight of us, he

dropped the head and made directly for us. Instantly I heard

Lamorin cry out loud and warn me to take to my heels;

when I asked him why he told me that this very man was
called Ijamba, or Peril, and that it was he who had fathered

Loss who lived in the household of Starvation. So we held

rapid dialogue with our heels and he sped after us. Soon I

could not see Lamorin nor did I hear any signs of Ijamba, so

I rapidly climbed up a tree with bag and gun, waiting until

I could hear or see signs of either.

Shortly afterwards, I saw Ijamba coming in my direction

looking here and there in his search for us. When he got

quite near me I heard him moaning, 'E-eh, my unlucky head,

my unlucky head! These succulent grubs have truly escaped,

what will be my supper tonight?' As he wailed thus he raised

his head and espied me. Ah, but his joy was great! He reached

out a long arm and seized me, threw me into his bag and
went on his way. I kept calm, but then my gun was in my
hands. I loaded it with large shot, primed it soundly and
rested a little. When I had rested I slammed the shot into

his skull and he fell down and died. Thus did I put an end
to the life of this man whose name was Peril, and I raised

my voice to summon Lamorin. He was most happy to see

Peril flattened on the ground like a log of timber.

We went to a lodge which Lamorin had built nearby and
there it was we spent the night.

We had no sooner finished preparing our supper that night,

and had sat down to eat than a tall figure arrived, greeted us,

and sat down to join us at table. I recognised at once that he

61



was a ghommid, and when he had taken two morsels from the

food, the meal was over. This was the breaking point, and 1

quietly took a large broken pot which we had used to build

a hearth and slammed it into his neck. He leapt up and went

off wailing. The following morning we found the potsherd

around the top of an iroko tree, but how the sherd on this

ghommid's neck had transferred to the neck of the iroko

tree was all a source of wonder to me.

We slept that night, and the following morning Lamorin
and I exchanged the day's greetings, ate, seized our guns and

went our different ways in search of game.

I had walked only a small distance before I saw a one-legged

creature lying asleep in the crevice of a tree, his crutch leaning

beside him. I went forward to where the crutch was and took

hold of it, my intention being to sneak it away from him and

then watch how he would move upon waking: but the moment
I touched it, something within the crutch cried out a warning.

The man was instantly awake but before he could react I had

snatched the crutch and, escaping with it, stood some dis-

tance away and laughed at his discomfiture. He pleaded with

me for a long time but I refused to release it until he prom-

ised to give me some spells for hunting. He then said to me:

T am Aroni, the one-legged ghommid. Evil in my home
is inexhaustible but so also is good within my home. I was a

most wicked ghommid who rebelled against God; the good

king Solomon admonished me but I paid him no heed.

Such was my arrogance before God that he punished me and

turned me into this one-legged creature. I have lived eight

hundred years in the world and still does my nature go with

me, so God in his anger decided thus, I will leave you to your

ways until you have suffered much at the hands of Death

whose home is in the dome of the heavens. And it is Death

whom I now await, so return my crutch to me, and I will

make you a gift.'

Hearing these words, 1 took pity on him and returned his

62



crutch, and he gave me a magic powder. All I had to do was
sprinkle it on the spoor of game, and whatever animal on
earth left the spoor would surely return at once to die on
that very spot. 1 tried this powder and it proved fire lethal.

But I did not use it too often lest I quickly exhaust it.

I had not long left this ghommid or progressed any great

distance when I met a remarkable creature who was no taller

than two feet. He had two heads and two horns—one horn
to each head. He was possessed of only one eye and this was
placed squarely on his chest. On meeting I greeted him and
he greeted me courteously, but his voice was rather out of

joint because he employed both mouths in speaking at once.

I asked him, 'Where do you come from and where are you
going?' and he replied, 'Why are you curious about me?'
Whereupon I said to him, 'I notice how short you are and

observe that you bear two heads about with you.' He replied,

saying 'Indeed I have two heads and I am remarkably short;

my name is Kurumbete, he whose home will be found on the

other side of heaven. I was one of the original angels who
were much beloved of God, but I rejected the laws of God and
His ways and engineered chaos in heaven. God saw that I was
intractable, and that my genius was an evil one. He handed
me to Satan to inflict agonies on me for seven years, and
even so did it come about that I lived in Hell for seven clear

years. I returned to God after the seventh year but He per-

ceived that there was no repentance in me, and He said in

His great anger, "You pester me, you ant; you kick at me,
you less than the little sand-fly. This day will I split your head
in two and prevent unity of thought in you. I will sow confu-

sion on your tongue as I did among the dwellers of the Tower
of Babel when they grew overbearing in their ways. I shall

cast you into the wilderness and there you shall be a wanderer
until a son of earth throws earth upon you."
'And so has it been since that day, you good hunter. There-

fore I implore you to cast a little earth on me for I am truly

63



weary of this wandering.' I was full of pity for him and threw

earth upon him, and instantly he turned into a large boulder

rooted in one spot until the end of the world.

As a result of these encounters, the ghemmids were much
reduced in my estimation; I had no further fear of them and

I continued normally about my business. As I wandered about

I met a remarkably beautiful woman and was greatly drawn
to her. I greeted her and she returned my greeting, but when
I asked her how she came to be wandering in this wilderness

she made no reply. After this I begged her to be my wife but

she refused. I pleaded and pleaded but she would have none

of me. Thereupon I tried to frighten her, threatened that if

she did not consent to wed me I would shoot her, but she

retorted that my gun could not affect her in the slightest.

In my mad anger I turned the gun on her and fired, but the

gun resounded merely, no shot emerged from it. Then she

turned and looked at me for a long time and said, 'If I did

not take pity on you I would kill you this very instant.' But

I told her straight that she could do nothing that would in

any way harm me; she turned on her heel and continued on
her way.

But her beauty drew me to pursue her and I followed and
held her by the wrist. She stared me full in the eye, fell down
and turned into a huge tree; but I hung on to the tree because

this woman attracted me wondrously. Then I saw this tree

transform itself into an antelope with flaring antlers but I

held on just the same. She struggled for a long time but my
hold on her remained unbreakable. Later she turned into a

roaring fire but I did not release her, neither was I harmed
by the flames. She underwent many transformations: she

became an enormous bird, she turned to a stretch of water

and then turned to a serpent, but I held on to her and there

was no breaking my hold. At last she returned to her form as

at the beginning; she looked at me and smiled, saying 'I will

wed you, you fearless hunter.'

64



And she was married to me and we became man and wife,

Lamorin officiating as priest. I threw a large feast and the

affair was truly grand: when man takes ghommid to wife,

the natives of earth and heaven banquet fit to burst.

Lamorin and I were friends, we were very fond of each

other and did not like to be parted. One day we went hunting,

and before we could return, night had already fallen; the

oil was used up in our lamps but the moon was bright as

daylight. When we had been roaming around for some time

we reached a huge rock, truly immense. Its mass was pock-

marked with deep holes and all the approaches to these holes

were worn dazzling smooth. Lamorin said that he wanted
to pass the night in one of them; I warned him not to but he

stubbornly insisted. When he had gone I climbed a large

tree to its top and stayed there watching the visage of earth.

Not long after there appeared an outsize creature ; he had four

eyes and six arms, he had two bristling horns, and he had
come out of one of these holes with a broken calabash full

of blood. He took it to the base of a tree which stood in front

of the rock, and I heard him say, 'I give thanks to you O lord

of mine, for I know that it was by your powers alone that

this venison came in of itself to meet me in my den. Grant
that such blessing be mine all the time, and thank you once
again.'

This was all to which I was witness. I waited till daybreak
but Lamorin did not emerge. At break of the following day I

shouted his name, but received no response; in a panic I came
down from the tree and rushed home to tell my wife. And of

course my wife, since she was no ordinary human, knew already

what was the fate of Lamorin. She said, 'Alas, that man you saw
is known as Tembelekun, his elder brother is known as Bilisi,

and his home is in the Bottomless Bog where my own mother
was born. Tembelekun married my junior sister, and they had
a son whose name is Chaos. That child grew up and sought

employment under Satan who is king of hell. I learnt later that

65



Chaos was a most conscientious worker and earned rapid

promotion at his job, and it pleases me greatly to learn that he
is at this moment foreman of those who feed the fires of hell

with oil. The only thing that I detest about these employees of

hell is that their bodies are sootier than the hearth, and their

cruelty is worse than that of monkeys. Therefore, my husband,

I greatly fear that Lamorin has fallen into the hands of Tem-
belekun, for Tembelekun eats neither yam nor maize, the hu-

man head alone is his meat—ah, what a pity !' Tears fell from
my eyes when I heard these words, I cried until my anguish filled

the forests, I moaned like a lion in pain, but not all my griev-

ing would bring back my friend.

Since my mother had rescued me from my confinement and
I had met Lamorin, my mind had shifted from thoughts of

home; I had come to love the Forest of Irunmale. But with

Lamorin dead I was again tired of the place and I began to

consider ways of returning home.
One day when I went to the bush to hunt, I happened on a

little trail and followed it, determined to go with it until it pet-

ered out. About noon I arrived at a little hut which was fami-

liar, and met a little child in it, and when I inspected him
closely it turned out to be my cousin, the child of my uncle who
was born after my mother. I was exceedingly happy and I

shouted to my uncle who was on his farm; he came, embraced

me and was full of joy. He asked me where I had been and why
I had stayed away for so long, but before I replied I asked

him to wait while I fetched and brought home my wife, and

he agreed. So I returned to my lodge to bring my wife with me.

I had not walked for ten minutes when I met my wife. This

was a great surprise for I had left her at home and I asked,

'My dear wife, I am astonished to see you here. I do hope

that nothing is wrong?' She replied, 'My beloved, my beloved,

my most dearly beloved one, I did not guess that parting would

befall us thus. My eyes went with you when you reached that

hut and met your own people. A spirit like the ghommid can

66



I

not join with human beings to live together, for evil are their

thoughts every day of their lives. Take this little cloth, it is a

gift for you; whenever you are hungry ask anything of it and
the cloth shall provide it. Ah me, because our love was great

I did not think that such a final break would befall us at the

height of noon. Ah, my dearest love, do not forget me until the

day that the cock shall crow on your depleted flesh—the na-

tive returns to his homeland—fare you well!'

And with these words a man appeared suddenly, and he took

hold of my wife and said, 'My sister, let us return to the Bot-

tomless Bog where lies our home.' And straightaway I saw
them no more, but there was the little cloth and I picked it up;

whenever I grew hungry and demanded food of it, the house
would be sumptuously filled with delicacies.

It grieved me that my wife had left me in this manner, so I

went to my lodge and packed my possessions, which had ac-

cumulated since I was lost in the forest, and returned to my
uncle's hut from where I eventually returned home. And thus

ends the tale ofmy second adventure in this most terrible forest.

Since the day of my homecoming I put my gun aside and
resolved never again to go hunting or embark on an arduous
task. For one reason, because of the hardships I always en-

countered. For another, the things I brought back with me that

second time were so numerous that, when I had sold them,

I was the wealthiest man up or down the entire kingdom—
was richer even than the king. And so this story ends as I said

before, and since it is also approaching nightfall, I shall re-

tire home and sleep. Tomorrow I will return and tell you all

that is left to tell.
* * *

And so the man finished his tale and ate a light meal. After

he was done, he shook hands with everyone who had come to

listen to him, and afterwards I accompanied him some of the

way and we shook hands a second time, saying to each other,

'Until tomorrow, may God grant that our reunion be with good.'

67



4

THE EXPEDITION TO MOUNT
LANGBODO

News had gone round the city that a certain elderly man came
daily to tell me tales of marvel, and before the early cock
crowed the following day, the entire populace had arrived;

they covered my home like a swarm of locusts. So when I saw
the house would take no more, I began to spread mats outside

the house. I unrolled mats until the mats were used up, then

had to go round and beg for mats where I could. I borrowed a

hundred and fifty before I could pause, and even these did not

suffice; some climbed trees, many sat on the rooftop—they

were as a flock of weaver-birds frolicking on the crown of the

palm.

Not long afterwards the man arrived and, even as he app-

eared to us, he cried, 'I cast aside all that went before and bring

you something new, so let you all re-tune your ears.' We all

fell silent in anticipation and he continued to speak:

'Ah, the sands on the sea shore cannot be counted, the

works of God are truly innumerable. When I first set eyes

upon you I was full of fear, but when I drew near my fear

deserted me. For at first I could not help but think that when
all of you will have died, all the iroko in the neighbouring bush

will not yield enough planks to bury you; but in the end I took

heart for I remembered that it is not everyone of you who will

pass away in bed.'

These words angered his listeners who began to retort,

'I will surely die a peaceful death! I will surely die a peaceful

68



death. .'
. . While they were repeating this, he waved to them

to be quiet and replied to them, thus, 'Words of truth are as

thorns, the honest man is the foe of the world. I wish to ask

you four questions; if you can answer them it means then that

I am at fault in what I said, but if you cannot it means that you
have not understood me at all. These are the questions : I would
like one of you to rise and tell me precisely on what day he

shall die; then I want him to tell me what manner of death he

will die—by illness or from the crash of a tree, or will he be

swept away by water? Thirdly, I would like to be told where

this person will die—will it be at home or on the farm, will it

be on the roadside or in his bedroom? In a strange land or in

this very town? And lastly, this—let this man tell me step by

step what things shall befall him from this moment until the day

of his death. Let him not omit to tell me when he will stub his

toe, when he shall fall ill, when he shall suffer bereavement,

when a fight shall take place between him and any other, how
many enemies he has already made and how many more he

shall make in his lifetime. Let this man remember finally that

the majority of lizards do indeed press their bellies to the

ground, but we do not know which of them really suffers from
stomach ache; we are sure only of those we love, not of those

who love us.'

When he had spoken thus no one could reply to him, for no
one can tell what day he shall die, nor does any man know what
manner of death he shall die, neither can any man foretell in

what spot he shall die or what events will happen to him until

the day of death. So when he saw that our tongues appeared to

be padlocked he said to us, 'Aha, I observe that you fall silent,

and the reason for your silence is this—the key to this world
remains in the keeping of God. Were it in human possession

there would be no illness, the poor would not exist, no one
would ever know hardship, there would be no servants, every-

one would be master in his own house—and the world would
be much worse than it is today.' His words amazed us greatly;

69



:

they were full of wisdom and we changed our tune and began
to tell him, 'There is truth in this, old man; do carry on with

your wise words.'

The old man thereupon began his tale and said:

My comrades all, I have beheld the ocean and have known
the sea, water holds no further terror for me! My eyes have
witnessed much in this world. Yesterday, I told you that

scourges were my lot during my second sojourn in the Forest of

a Thousand Daemons, and I told you how I resolved never

again to hunt or set my hand on any arduous task. I must con-

fess this to you, that promise I made, it was a futile thing.

I performed yet another deed of an arduous nature.

It happened this way—it was in fact the season of harmat-
tan and I rose late in the morning, for since I became wealthy

I had taken to waking up late—too much thinking kept me
awake most of the night. I had lately returned from my second

hunting adventure and when the women of the town saw in me
a new man of wealth, they began to beset my house in thou-

sands, and I took them to wife with equal zeal. Many of them
did I marry because they were not really interested in my char-

acter. They declared, 'It's your wealth we understand, we
have no interest in your behaviour. Even if you wallop us with

your gun and bash our heads with your hunting bag, marry
you we shall.'

But, before long, as they began to see my hunter's ways and
my riotous temperament which came from long dealings with

beasts and ghommids of the forest, they began to sneak off

one by one, until, on this morning of which I speak, only nine

wives were left me. I was chatting with one of them when this

hazardous business on which I was to embark reared its head.

This is how it happened
A king's messenger stepped through my doorway and in-

formed me that the king desired my presence. This was cause

enough for amazement and I rose, donned my dandogo, my

70



dog-ears cap, my forty-four bottoms and, fully decked out,

took myself to the king's palace.

I had no sooner come within sight of him than he called out,

his cheeks bursting with pleasure, 'Akara-ogun', and I in turn

replied, 'Kabiyesi, it is indeed I. May God give you a long life.'

Then he sang out to me a second time, 'Akara-ogun', and

I answered him, 'Live long, live honoured; we are all children

under your fold.'

And yet he hailed me a third time, 'Akara-ogun,' and I re-

plied to him in these words, 'Kabiyesi, it is a veritable man
whose name you call. I am indeed Akara-ogun, Compound-of-
Spells; even as my name is, so am I. I am no morsel for the

sorcerer, no witch can harm me, no prodigal-with-sacrifice

dealer in charms can find a way to touch me.'

The king fell to laughing again and said, 'Seat you on my
right.'

When I had made myself quite comfortable he turned to me
saying, 'Akara-ogun my son, I have a mission to request of

you, a most important one. And before I even tell you what
it is I must ask you, will you perform this task for me ?'

I hardly allowed the words out of his mouth before I re-

plied, 'Kabiyesi, this is a very small matter indeed. Wherever it

pleases the wind even there does he direct the forest tops; the

slave goes simply where his owner orders him—wherever you
wish to send me, do so, I must go.'

This promise I made was a most thoughtless one. I had land-

ed right in the king's trap and he began to address me thus:

'My child, are you aware that there is nothing on earth which
surpasses well-being? And do you realise that there is nothing

more deserving of honour than serving one's country? These
two objectives have greater value than gold or silver, and it is

on their account that I have to send you on this errand.

'Before my father died he was fond of telling me about the

king of a certain city which is approached by the same route

as leads to the Forest of a Thousand Daemons. The name

71



of this city is Mount Langbodo. He said that the king of this

place had a singular object which he presented to hunters who
visited him there. He never mentioned the object by name but
he did say that, if this thing came into the hand of any king,

the king's domain would win an abundance of peace and well-

being, and its fame would resound to every corner upon earth.

Because you have journeyed into the Forest of a Thousand
Daemons on two occasions, it gives me great joy to summon
you today and beg of you from the very depths of my heart not
to fail to snatch a brief glimpse of this same king and bring

me this thing in his possession.'

When the king had spoken these words, I was greatly fright-

ened. For a long time now, I had heard many tales of Mount
Langbodo but had never yet encountered anyone who had
made the journey and returned to tell the tale. Before anyone
came into that city he would first have to brave the length of
the Forest of Irunmale, and that is only the beginning of the

journey. It can hardly be regarded as a place on earth, be-

cause the dwellers of Langbodo hear, in the most distinct notes,

the crowing of cocks from the heavenly vault. You can imag-
ine how little I desired any part of such an undertaking, but

the promise was made—there was no remedy for going.

'Kabiyesi,' I answered him, 'you are the father of all; and it

is the truth you reveal when you elders say—even if the young
man's wardrobe matches the elder's he cannot boast as many
rags. I make obeisance. I learn now that although I boast num-
erous experiences in my past, yet, in wisdom, I am no match
for you. With great cunning you extracted this pledge from
me, and whether I wish it or not, I must go. Not that it matters,

for it is my own country which I serve, go I shall. But I crave

first a little favour from you. I want to send a crier round the

entire land to summon all such seasoned hunters as I and send

us together on this quest, that my head goes not forth alone to

combat death. Nor will this be enough. Send messengers to

all the neighbouring villages and homesteads that their bold

72



hunters may join us on this mission to Mount Langbodo. If

you would only do this, the matter is settled; only the going
remains.'

The king was made happy by these words from me; imme-
diately he commanded that my wishes be carried out and,

within three days, hunters filled the palace courtyard. I looked
among these men and I could not find one hunter named
Kako. And I knew most surely that he should be part of an
expedition of this nature, for a veritable strongman is he.

His history goes like this—his mother, a gnom; his father a

dewild. Unfortunately, when their child was born, his skin

was almost human and so were his various members. His par-

ents, ghommids both, were having none of this so they aban-
doned him in a hollow beneath an ako tree. A passing hunter

discovered him, took him home and reared him. He it was who
gave him the name Kako (a foundling by the ako). When we
were children we played together and it was from this time

that I knew what manner of being he was. When he was twelve

he killed a leopard with a matchet and informed no one*at

home of his exploit. But when the creature had begun to rot,

Kako returned to the spot and removed its thigh-bone, turn-

ing it into a club, and from then he earned the name of Kako-
who-Wields-a-Leopard-Club. Hardly had my father died when
his guardian also passed away, and when I went on my first

adventure into the Forest of a Thousand Daemons he turned

his feet into the Great Forest. A most evil forest is the Great
Forest; its wild beasts are far more numerous than those of a

Thousand Daemons, but the ghommids of the latter exceed

those of the Great Forest. At the time this expedition was
planned, Kako had not yet returned from the Great Forest

and I had to go and seek him there.

I did not arrive at the Forest on the same day as I set out

because I was late leaving town. I slept on the way and, about
ten o'clock the following morning, I encountered Kako him-
self. When I saw him, I could not recognise him; he was all

73



covered in palm leaves—I little dreamt that he was getting mar-
ried to a ghommid on that very day. As soon as he saw me
Kako leapt down from the tree on which he sat, ran towards
me and embraced me; there was much rejoicing between us.

He told me all his adventures since he came into the Great

Forest and informed me also that he had heard great things

about my own formidable exploits in the Forest of a Thousand
Daemons. He told me many, many things but I cannot begin

to retell them in detail because such a tale would require a sep-

arate book of its own. And when he had done, I embarked
on the chronicle of my own harrowing experiences; when I

had finished we embraced each other again and flooded over

with rejoicing, because it was indeed a meeting of strongmen.

All this while, I did not forget the purpose of my visit,

and after a while I said to him, 'Kako, Wielder of the Leo-

pard Club, my playmate since our childhood days, will you
forbear with me while I iron out a little proverb?' And he

replied, 'My dear Akara-ogun, hammer away, I'm listening.'

So I continued with my discourse, and I said, 'You realise,

don't you, that if a man's garments have not seen the last of

lice, his finger-nails cannot have flicked off the last of blood?'

And he said, 'Yes, there is no falsehood about that.' So I

continued and told him, 'Kako, until we have overcome all

obstacles, can we really pause to rest? There are many goals

left for us to conquer, many feats left for us to accomplish,

many marvels waiting for us to perform; our country still

lacks sufficient renown among nations beneath the sky.

Were there no cause for it, a woman would not answer to the

name of Kumolu; if there was not a good reason behind it,

I would not come so early to seek you out. And the reason

is this: many hunters, many of whom even lack our daring,

are priming themselves for a journey to Mount Langbodo;

they are going to battle dangers for the prestige of our country,

and, when I had given this matter much thought, it occurred

to me that you ought to go with us. If we do not go it is

74



:

a matter of shame for us, and it would also appear that we
only care about our individual selves and recognise nothing

of our country's needs. And an unworthy thing it is if one
forgets his land, for let a craft voyage the oceans and voyage

the seas, sooner or later it must head for port; no matter

where we triumph in these forests, we must return home some
day. My words are, I hope, worthy of your consideration my
friend.'

Let us, unlike the mat unfolding on the ground, cut a long

story short—Kako gathered together his possessions, got

ready and followed me.

According to the custom of ghommids in the Great Forest,

man and woman must live together for seven years before

they undergo the ceremonies of a wedding. By then the

woman would have given him children, and both man and
wife would be thoroughly accustomed to each other's ways.

If at the end of this period they find each other compatible,

they get married—this, in their idiom, is a white wedding.

If however matters stand otherwise, they take leave of each

other with mutual satisfaction, the man to seek a new wife,

the woman to hold herself in readiness for another man. It

was this custom which accounted for the fact that I found
Kako all decked out in palm leaves on his wedding day.

You will have guessed from this that Kako had lived with his

woman for seven years before our reunion in the Great
Forest, and it is an amazing thought that throughout his

preparations, and even up to the moment when he followed

me on this wedding day, he had not informed his bride. It

was most unbecoming behaviour.

But when the woman learnt of his departure, she flew after

us, and, catching up, clung to his feet and spoke thus

'What can the matter be, my husband? What trouble have
I stirred awake? What offence have I committed to warrant

this? In what manner have you been aggrieved? Did you
discover me with another man? Have I ever spoken in an

75



—

unseemly manner to you? Have I neglected to show my
love sufficiently? Were you told I brawl in public? Did you
hear gutter language from my lips? Am I extravagant? Am
I vain? Or is it that I am unclean in my habits? Are my man-
ners careless or disrespectful towards you? Am I obstinate

towards you? Or is it that I am a failure as housekeeper?
Have I failed to look after your guests in a fitting manner?
Could it be that I am simply a failure when it comes to seeing

to your comfort? Don't I know how a woman talks to her

husband ? Or is it that I have failed to help you in your own
work? What conceivable crime could it be? Tell me, please

tell me, in God's name don't fail to tell me, my lord, my hus-

band, my beloved.'

Kako replied and said to her, 'In truth, a woman who
knows all these cautions you have set down could never offend

her husband, and, unless I lie in the matter, I must admit that

you have never offended in one of them, not even in the matter

of late meals of which thousands of women are guilty every

hour upon earth. But when a crisis comes, it comes, and that

is that. At twilight, hundreds of leaves slumber on the bough;
come darkness and beasts roam the forests in their hundreds

there is a time for everything; a time to play, a time to fight;

a time for tears, a time even for joy; this is my time for

departure, and my going will yield to nothing. Therefore, go
on your way, and I on mine. If you find another husband,

wed him; but do not count on Kako any more—the son of

strangers departs on the business of his homeland—fare you
well.'

On hearing these words of Kako, the woman burst into

tears and entreated him again, but he made no pretence of

listening; he simply grabbed his club, stuck his matchet
in its sheath and walked on briskly as when the office clerk

hurries to his place of business. When the woman saw that the

matter was past helping, she began to speak most piteously

in the following words:

76



'Ah! Is this now my reward from you? When at first you
courted me I refused you, but you turned on the honey

tongue and fooled me until I believed that there lived no man
like you. I gave you my love so selfiessly that the fever of love

seized me, that the lunacy of love mounted my head, that

love's epilepsy racked me on your account. I could not eat

unless I saw you, I could not drink unless you were with me;

if I wished to go out you had to come with me, if I heard

your voice anywhere I had to seek you there, and whenever

my passion overwhelmed me I would leave my home and

wander near yours, talking fast and loud so that you might

know I was nearby. You know that I have neither father nor

mother, that I have no siblings younger or older; alone you
have replaced all these for me. Now when hands have clasped

hands and feet slid in step you threaten to abandon me at

the very height of day! You wish that I should become the

laughing-stock of all the forest beings who will jeer and say

to me, "You were so damned sure; well, tell us, can it be

done?" Ah, may God judge you guilty you despoiler of lives!'

And she wrapped herself tightly round Kako saying, 'You
are going nowhere, not until you find some way to dispose

of me.'

Our delay grew longer with the woman's desperate hold

and Kako grew truly angry. His face was transformed and
he pulled out his matchet, saying, 'Woman of death, mother
of witchery seeking to obstruct my path of duty, know you
not that before earth destroys the evil-doer, much good has

already suffered ruin! Before God adjudges me guilty I shall

pass sentence on your guilt.' And, having spoken, be slashed

her amidriffs, and it lacked only a little for the woman to be

cloven clean in two; she fell on earth twitching in the final

throes of death crying the name of Kako, crying his name
into the other world. Great indeed was my terror!

We set upon the road and headed for home. We both slept

at my father's house on that night, for Kako has no dwelling

77



in the town. The following morning I went to the king and

told him that it would be good to set a date for our departure

and we settled for nine days hence.

For those nine days Kako and I made merry, for many of our

friends who had lived in the jungle for a long time returned

home and many times did we go and visit them, and we all

together would set out on palm wine rounds; whenever the

conversation turned on the matter of Kako and his wife,

they all would tease him saying, 'Deal-me-death thrusts her

neck at the husband—such was the wife of Kako.'

Like a light wind the seven days blew away and on the night

of the eighth day Kako and I had prepared our packs and

by dawn the following morning we had cooked yam, pounded

and breakfasted on it. By half past eight in the morning we
were ready and we proceeded to the palace where the king

himself was already seated in state in the open air; the town

was assembled, the crowd was numerous as an invasion of

locusts on a farm. Several of the hunters had not arrived when
we got there but by ten o'clock they were all assembled. Ah
my friends, narrating is the poor brother of witnessing; these

hunters filled the hearts of the beholders with awe. They

were tall, garbed in hunters' smocks, their bags were slung

over their shoulders, some wore trousers and others loin-

cloths, all of them had treated their guns with medicines and

charms, they were black as oil soap.

I cannot give you all their names but will tell you a little

about the most important six in the expedition, those who
were the most intrepid and the most experienced. These, when

I am included, made seven altogether. I will mention their

names as they lined up in front of the king. The first was

Kako of the Leopard Club, but his history you already know.

Next stood Imodoye who is a maternal relation of mine.

When he was only ten he was snatched away by the Whirl-

wind and he lived for seven years with him. In all those seven

years he lived on a single alligator pepper every day. He was

78



well versed in charms, wise and very knowledgeable, he was

also a highly titled hunter. These qualities earned him the

name of Imodoye, that is, knowledge fuses with understand-

ing. I stood in the third position. Fourth was Olohun-iyo,

the Voice of Flavours; he was the most handsome of all men
on earth, the finest singer and the best drummer. When
he drummed smoke rose in the air, and when he sang flames

danced out of his mouth; his favourite music was the music

of incantations. The fifth was Elegbede-Ode. He was a human
child but had lived to maturity among wild animals, for when
he was born he had three eyes, one at the back of his head.

This led his mother to cast him in the bush, and there it was

he began to live among baboons and grew immensely strong.

After a while he returned to town and lived in the palace, but his

nature was unruly, like the baboons, and this was what made
men refer to him as Elegbede-Ode, for Elegbede is the father

of the baboon. He stayed a long while with the king, the

king bought him a gun and he turned to hunting. He under-

stood the language of birds and the language of beasts, and

was stronger than a lion. If you hit him he felt it not,

if you knocked him down he did not care at all; nor did

an iron rod have the slightest effect on him. The sixth was

called Efoiye. He was not a native of our town at all and
I had never met him until the matter of Mount Langbodo
raised its head. He was an archer and he really belonged

to the family of birds, for instead of hairs he had little

feathers growing from his body. He plucked them out all

the time to avoid the jeers of people but whenever he was
fully clothed no one could see them. He brought his wings

into use only when deadly danger threatened him on his

hunts. Wherever Efoiye sent his arrow there it went unfailingly.

Even if he did not see the quarry it was enough that he ordered

his bow to hunt it down and this it did without failing. But

he was forbidden to shoot more than seven arrows a day if he

wished to avoid the wrath of Sokoti, the Heavenly Smith,

79



whose present the bow was to Efoiye's father. The seventh

was the Miraculous Man, Aramada-okunrin, a relation of

Efoiye on the side of his father. He was a most singular man,
for when he was under the sun or inside fire, he would feel

cold, but whenever the weather turned cold, he sweated from
heat; everything about him was the wrong way round.

So we were quite a strange gathering who set out on this

great expedition; when we were all paraded before him, the

king gave us sound advice and, when he was done, Imodoye
began to address the gathering thus:

'Fellow citizens of this land, we thank you for coming to

see us today. This is the usage of fellow beings; you have

acted as good-natured people towards us, you have given

us stimulation, made us confident; you have raised our hearts'

eagerness for this great adventure. If there is no cause the

twig does not snap, if there were no reason at all for it you
would not see us gathered here today. All who you see before

you here are bound for Mount Langbodo, and we go at the

behest of our land. No matter how pleasant is the foreign

land, he who boasts a home always returns home; no matter

how delightful these strange lands may be to us, we will not

fail to remember our home. If our town is small so that it

looks like a birdN nest, yet the town is our town, if our city

is filthy and looks more like a dung-heap yet the city is our

city, if our nation is backward so that its citizens have not

experienced civilisation, yet our nation is still our nation

and only its own people will administer it; it is the people

who will turn the dirt to cleanliness, they who must turn the

small town into an important one. But whoever says that his

birthplace is no longer his, that person is a half-witted fool.

From the wealth of my knowledge and experience I know that

this is a most perilous journey on which we embark; evil

will join evil, tribulations will pile on tribulations; it is not

as we leave you that we shall return. Many of us will never

set eyes upon this town again. But when we are gone, do not

80



forget us. And so I greet you on behalf of all my comrades,

this blessed company journeying now to Mount Langbodo.

We leave you our relations, we leave you our acquaintances,

we leave you our homes, we leave you our paths; do not fail

to take care of that part of us we leave behind. If we return,

good, and if we do not, reunion is in heaven.'

When he had finished all the women burst out weeping

and all the men were near to crying, but he turned to us and

said:

'My comrades who go now to Mount Langbodo, make
your minds resolute and act like men of strength. What
glory is there to him who merely lives in luxury but does no
service for his land? What honour can an indolent man poss-

ess that will compare with that of a man of steel? I want you
to understand that the skull of a lazy man is not worth the

fingernail of a strong man; if his self-display flags for one

single moment, the next moment his emptiness becomes
revealed to all. Why then do I see you look gloomy ?Sodeke
performed great deeds among the Egba and departed ; Ogedeng-

be fulfilled his share among the Ijesa and went his way;

Ogunmola did wonders among the Yoruba and went his way.

So now, I ask you, shall we fulfil our own task or shall we not?'

Imodoye's manner of speaking was very effective and it

steeled our hearts. Together we all declared, 'We shall fulfil our

share, let us go.'

And so we set our heads to the goal; all the people followed

us. They accompanied us right to the border and returned

home in tears. After they had all returned a certain old man
followed us and, when all the well-wishers had returned,

he stopped us and said, 'Listen you young fellows, as you
proceed on this trip, watch out for acts of dissension among
you. Remember that it takes two hands to lift a load to the

head, it takes five fingers to lift the food to the mouth—make
your counsel one. From this day on, do not remember your
homes, follow the route which leads to your destination,

81



;

watch only where you are bound. If wild animals attack you,
fight them off, if evil spirits trouble you, trouble them in turn,

and when you are finally by yourselves always re-assess your
plans. If you pay heed to these words of mine, all shall be
well for you, but if you reject them, that day is coming when
you will say, Ah, that old man did tell us so.' When he had
thus spoken, he turned back for home, accompanied by his

tears.

I will not recount all our experiences before we crossed the

Forest of a Thousand Daemons; when I find some leisure

we shall talk of these some other day, but I will not fail to

mention briefly something of the kingdom of ghommids whose
ruler was my good friend. I told you his story yesterday, told

you how we met on my second sojourn in the Forest; it was
in the place where I killed the one-eyed leopard. We called

on his kingdom again and he took very good care of us, even
providing plenty of food for our journey. He told me also

that the dog which I was accused of stealing was not dead
that it was my enemies who took and hid it, in order to

create an occasion to triumph over me.

Our plans accomplished in the Forest of Irunmale, we set

our heads on the road to Mount Langbodo, and then, a mem-
orable event took place. It happened thus: suddenly we were

surrounded by a dense thicket and the trail vanished from our

sight; we could turn neither left nor right, the thicket was like

a solid fence and I doubt if a mouse could have found an open-

ing for escape. We endeavoured to hack a way through this

bush but the stalks grew back as soon as they were cut, and in

the end we surrendered ourselves to death and dared what-

ever would happen to do its worst. But, in the evening of the

third night of our confinement to this one spot, we noticed two
big birds fly in and land on a tree quite close to us. Kako raised

his gun to shoot at them but was stopped by Elegbede-Ode,

and after a while Elegbede himself aimed his gun and shot one

of them. Do not forget that Elegbede could understand the

82



language of beasts, and it was the content of their talk which

made him stay Kako's hand. One of the birds—the very one

which Elegbede shot—had been saying to the other that Kako
was the cause of our present predicament and that the occa-

sion for it was the guiltless woman whom he had killed in the

Great Forest some days before, for this woman had cried for

redress to heaven. The bird said also that unless he was killed

and sacrificed and used in a rite of appeasement for the terrible

sin of Kako, God would not relent towards us and we would
never emerge from our imprisonment. This was why Elegbede

killed the bird. According to our own usage, we split the bird

open and poured oil in it; we placed it in a small potsherd and
left it at the foot of a large tree nearby. The heart of God soft-

ened towards us—not because of the sacrifice itself, but be-

cause he knew that we would worship him in a more befitting

manner if only we had a better understanding than this.

Shortly afterwards I had an inspiration. I remembered the

woman who had rescued me from Agbako's clutches the other

day, so I took some incense from my bag, made a little fire and
began to burn it ; I called on her to surface from the bowels of

earth and performed the rites as a seasoned hunter. Shortly

afterwards, she emerged from the earth before us and I told

my companions thus, 'Look you, here comes the woman who
rescued me from where Agbako imprisoned me; her name is

Helpmeet.' And when she was near to us she asked, 'Akara-

ogun, here I am, why do you summon me?' So I unburdened
to her the entire tale of our great adversity, how we had sought

a route of escape for three whole days, how Elegbede-Ode had
overheard two birds conversing and how we had acted accord-

ing to their revelation ; that it was on account of this that I

summoned her from the earth so that she might endeavour
to release us from our present bondage.

Iranlowo listened to everything; when I was done she bade
us follow her, and so we did. All the growth that surrounded
us began to part before us as we moved forward. Soon we were

83



once again on the road to Mount Langbodo and she turned

from us to resume her wandering.

We did not journey much after this before it was night and
we slept. Hardly had the cuckoo cried the following dawn be-

fore we were up and setting our feet on the road, nor did we
encounter any danger until about half past ten when we saw
a man before us whose name was Fear, Eru.

When we saw the man we were truly afraid, for this man
had four heads: one was human enough and faced the East;

the second was like the head of a lion and was turned to the

West; the third was a serpent's, its tongue darted incessantly

and spouted venom—this was to the North, and the fourth was

the head of a poisonous fish from whose mouth flared huge

flames—and this was turned southwards. Myriad snakes were

coiled around his neck and innumerable scorpions had made
his shoulders their home : he was excessively hairy. Wasps and
stinging bees flew round him in thousands and he caressed

them as he walked. At his approach, a great gust blew and
the forest was filled with noises, both timber and palm raised

shouts of, 'Fear comes to the head of the disobedient, he

is a sword in the hand of God to cut away the stubborn lest

they become a hindrance upon earth.' This man was indeed a

figure of terror and when he saw us he stood and watched.

Kako and Elegbede moved towards him to join battle with

him, but they could not close on him, chased back by wasps

and bees. They made many attempts but all to no avail.

Efoiye loosed his arrows on him but they did not affect him;

each one of us made trial of our various powers but nothing

seemed to affect him. In the end Imodoye advised that Olo-

hun-iyo should sing a dirge, not the kind of tune which raised

fire and smoke but a melody full of pathos which would soften

the man's heart towards us and make him take pity on us.

Olohun-iyo performed according to the words of Imodoye; he

sang how God created earth and heaven, how God loved man-
kind so well that He would himself visit earth from time to

84



:

time as a friend, how it came about that the sins of man dis-

couraged God so that he did not come any more, and all men
began to flee from sin because it was an evil thing. The song

told how, on account of this, any one who made himself a

hindrance to his fellow men was the greatest sinner of all,

insomuch as God once said: it were best that a millstone be

hung from the neck of such a man, and he be cast into the

ocean. And he sang that our journey had one motive only,

namely to perform some good for our country, a purpose in

which God took great delight. He sang also of our various

tribulations in the past, the like of which was never exper-

ienced by human beings, and how only God could rescue us

from any further hindrance in the pursuit of our goal!

Even as he sang he interwove the occasional spell and, be-

fore long, Eru turned tail and fled. Thus did we overcome by
mere song a foe who was impervious to guns and bows, for

whatever it is that man attempts by gentleness does not come
to grief, but that which we handle with violence rebounds on
us with equal toughness.

We returned to our route and walked on until it became dark
and the wailing cuckoo began to cry. Each man laid his back
to earth wherever was easiest, and slept off. God be praised

that we woke up without mishap the following morning, and
proceeded on our way.

It was about half past seven in the morning when we arrived

at a certain town, and when we were about to enter, we obser-

ved a notice on the town gates which said

Father of birds the Ostrich,

this is indeed the King of birds.

The Creator does not object

that anyone should kill a bird for food.

The Creator does not mind
that birds be killed for a good purpose.

85



But whosoever has at any time

wantonly killed a bird,

To him this town is forbidden.

This, had we but known it, was the city of birds, and the

Ostrich was their king. If a man came into the city who had
ever been guilty of the needless killing of a bird, a red mark,
rather like a blood smear, would appear in a big globule before

him, yet he might remain completely unaware of it. When we
entered the city we knew nothing of this and had we not all

stoned birds in our childhood and killed them without a pur-

pose at some time in our lives? But we suspected nothing until

their police arrested us and took us before their king, the Ost-

rich. This Ostrich I speak of was quite different from the nor-

mal run of ostriches. He was bird only from his neck down-
wards, the rest was human. His head was as big as a man's and
it was shining bald in the middle. When he saw us he demand-
ed with great anger, 'Who are these? Where did you come
from? Where are you going? Doubtless you are thieves, and
the mark of bandits is clearly branded on your foreheads.

Therefore, prepare! Let loincloths be well secured and trous-

ers belted tight, for I will show you a thing or two this day.

I shall assign three tasks to you and, if you fail in them, most
assuredly I shall slaughter you for food.'

Kako was furious and wanted to reply to him with defiance,

but Imodoye restrained him. Imodoye then told the Ostrich,

'We have not come to steal, neither are we here to harm any-

one. Our destination is Mount Langbodo, and if you have any

task to give us, do so, but we do not wish to fight with you;

we are here in friendship.'

It seemed as if their king was a little appeased on listening

to these words of Imodoye. He told us that the first task, for

which we would select one among us, would be to fight a cer-

tain wild animal who lived in his father's shrine. It was a li-

zard-shaped creature but one the size of four huge men and

86



had a single horn on his head; this horn he used for pinning

down game and it had never been known to miss. The king

himself set eyes on this creature only once a year, and then

only with the aid of spells and incantations.

As you all know, Kako was widely experienced in hunting,

and when the king had made his demand, he quickly volun-

teered to go and fight the beast. This astonished the Ostrich

and he was filled with compassion, for Kako is a most hand-

some man, tall and lanky; he was taller than the rest of us by

a head at least. But when the Ostrich saw that he was indeed

resolved to go he left him alone, expecting that Kako was going

to meet his death. We also were greatly afraid, and it was with

tears that we followed him.

When we arrived and entered the shrine, the Ostrich took us

to the backyard where grew several fruit trees. In front of us,

even as we entered this enclosure, was a narrow trail which led

unswervingly to a little hut about two minutes walk from where
we stood; this was the dwelling of the beast. This beast could

speak like a human being and, no sooner did we come to the

shrine than the king sent a messenger to inform him that he

had brought him someone for food. As soon as the message
was delivered he emerged from the house, and when we set

eyes upon him we fled each and everyone of us, the king includ-

ed; only Kako stood his ground. He stood in front of a cer-

tain tree, leaning against it, and when the creature saw him he

made a headlong charge in his direction and, from a few yards

away, leapt at him with great strength to gore Kako with his

horn. But Kako waited until the beast was quite close, then

dodged nimbly so that the beast rammed the tree and the

horn entered and stuck firmly within it. Kako rejoiced on see-

ing this, but instead of proceeding straightaway to cut the

beast to pieces, he first of all took up a big stone and ham-
mered in the horn more thoroughly. Then he pulled out his

club and clubbed the animal to death.

Thus did he slay this brutish creature, and as he emerged

87



'Who are these? Where do you come from? Doubtless you are thieves.

88



from the shrine both man and beast were awe-stricken and the

Ostrich raised his fist to him in admiration.

Thus ended the first task, but there was still the next. The
king of birds called Imodoye and told him that we must again

choose one among us who would prepare himself to fight the

sand-elves. These elves were no taller than a foot, each was
armed with a little whip, and they were numerous. Hardly had
Imodoye delivered the news when Kako stepped out again and
chose himself for the encounter. We all rejected the offer but

he was adamant. Even as we argued it up and down our beau-

tiful friend appeared to us—Iranlowo, the same woman who
had rescued me from Agbako's confinement. She had a cer-

tain pouch in her hand and bade us let Kako go forward, so

we agreed. Before Kako left, the woman gave him this bag and
told him that as soon as the elves appeared he was to sprinkle

them with sand from the bag. If he did this they would go blind

and inflict death upon one another. She explained further that

this sand was sand from the vault of heaven, created specially

by the Creator for blinding those who stood in the way of

others when they were engaged in a noble cause. She advised

Kako not to take his club but he insisted he would; we all

spoke in the same vein but Kako would not budge—he said,

'The shell never deserts the snail; wherever I go, my club must
keep me company.' It was getting late so Imodoye put an

end to the argument and informed the king that we were

ready.

The Ostrich was astonished that Kako was again our choice,

and he was persuaded that this indeed would be the end of

Kako. He led Kako outside the city walls and we all followed

them. When we had left the city and walked a little in the bush,

we arrived at a flat open space which was full of sand and was
bare of growth. It was about a mile wide in every direction and,

when we arrived, the Ostrich paused, took a cow and slaugh-

tered it in sacrifice to the sand-elves. Imodoye in turn quickly

took a home-pigeon and a dove and offered them in sacrifice,

89



saying, 'Honour comes home to the home-pigeon, ease is the

nature of doves, this day must surely end in glory for Kako.'

When Imodoye had finished the king threw water before him
and began some incantations. After this had gone on for some
time, we looked before us, and the sand-elves swarmed to-

wards us numerous as locusts—we were truly afraid. Kako bra-

ced himself and went to meet them and when they saw him they

ran even faster towards him. Before long, they locked horns

with him as thousands of locusts might swarm over a small

maize patch, covered him up as a thousand ants cover up
food crumbs. Kako had forgotten what he ought to do, he

pulled out his club and began to batter them. In a moment he

had despatched some fifty, but what are fifty among a number-
less horde! They covered him in a pulsating swarm; those

who could, stabbed him, those who could bite, bit him, those

who could punch him did so, and still others pinched him;

it was great agony for Kako.
When this had continued for a while and it had become im-

possible to see any part of Kako, Iranlowo told Olohun-iyo

to start drumming, and to sing a reminder to Kako of his

instructions. Olohun-iyo tuned up and began to sing and as he

sang flames burst out and smoke engulfed us where we stood;

as it was for us, so also for the king of birds and even the sand-

elves, everyone forgot about the fight and began to dance.

It was in the course of the dancing that Kako heard the words
of Olohun-iyo; quickly he took sand from his bag and threw it

on the elves and all of them went blind. After this Iranlowo

told the drummer to stop and he did so, and upon this the

sand-elves began to fight one another until only one was left,

and this Kako killed with his club. Thus ended the second

assignment from the Ostrich, king of birds.

Before we turned to depart, the king of these birds told us

not to leave just yet, but to complete the third task right away.

He told us that there was a being whose name was Were-Orun,
Lunatic of Heaven. This man was so wicked that the Creator

90



expelled him from heaven and sent him to the city of birds.

He had hoped that perhaps, by listening to the dulcet voices of

birds all the time, his heart would grow gentler and he would
leave off his intractable nature. But rather than sing soft airs

to soften his heart, the birds preferred to give him gory assign-

ments. Whenever there was killing to be done they would sum-
mon the Lunatic from his den and hand the victim over, and
instantly Were-Orun would devour him, be he human or beast,

bird or ghommid.
The den of this terrifying creature was not far from where we

were, and when Kako declared that he felt like a little more
exercise we left him alone to try his hand. When we arrived

with the Ostrich at lthe air of this being, the Ostrich called

out to him. On the man's approach the earth began to tremble,

thunder resounded and smoke gushed from the face of hea-

ven—this was why our buttocks turned to water from fear,

and I nearly excreted in my trousers. When eventually he him-
self appeared in the distance, his eyes were as kernels, and the

breath from his nostrils like steam from boiling water. He came
towards us and Kako in turn advanced on him; they met and
they began to fight. His thought was to rip Kako in pieces in

one second but the affair was not to be as he thought; Kako
in turn also planned to tear him apart. They wrestled until dust

rose to smother the skies and we could not see them both
clearly—alas, that day's fight cannot be recounted fully in a

book for time is flying. After a long time Were-Orun grew
furious for he had never fought with a man like Kako. He spat

on his hands and when he had muttered an incantation he rub-

bed the spit on his head and instantly his body was engulfed in

flames so that Kako retreated fast and could not hold on to

him. This angered Elegbede-Ode and Aramada the Miraculous
Man and they both rushed on the man and began to fight him,
but before long Elegbede could bear the heat no longer and he
retreated. But Aramada felt nothing for his nature was differ-

ent; the more he fought the colder he felt. Before long the fire

91



was such that we could see neither of them, they were wholly

engulfed in the inferno.

It burnt for about two hours before it died, and when it

had died down, it was the corpse of the Lunatic of Heaven
that we saw. Aramada-okunrin sat upon it, and laughing

said, 'I have slain him, come on and take a look; I do not even

feel I have had a fight, except for a little cold which bothers me.'

And so we ended the three tasks which these birds gave

us through the hands of their king, the Ostrich.

When we had completed them, the king invited us to dine

and he cooked a sumptuous feast for us. Every man of us

ate and was full; Kako ate the share of six men, and drank

a full keg of wine. And when he had drunk and was quite

tipsy, he moved close to the king and rapped him on the head

saying, 'Isn't that some shine you have on your head.' This

behaviour angered the birds and they attacked us, and when
I observed that they seemed to be getting the better of us I

took out one of the pods which the gnom had given me on my
last adventure, broke it, and passed one pepper apiece to my
comrades, swallowing one myself. The moment these peppers

sank down wings sprouted from our arms and we began to fly

skywards in full flight, but the birds flew after us and the

fight continued in the skies. A most fierce battle this was,

and during it we lost Janduku the junior brother of Kako
and Ojuri the brother of Imodoye. In the end, however, we
triumphed over these birds and headed for Mount Langbodo,

still on the wing. We had flown for some time when Kako
suggested that we return to walking on our feet, for flying

as we were gave the appearance of our being afraid; to this

we agreed. When I had served them peppers from a different

pod and we had all swallowed them, the wings on our arms

retracted and we resumed our march.

Not long afterwards we arrived at the kingdom of animals

where we again experienced all manner of things; alas, I can-

not tell you all the details but I will share this tit-bit with

92



you: it was there I lost my tooth—my canine tooth—and

since that day I have been unable to chew properly. I became

a ventilated mouth.
When we departed from the kingdom of animals, we crossed

the indigo river and crossed the river of blood, we touched

the country of the twelve-armed men and passed the abode

of the seven viragos who weep incessantly upon earth. But

how many should I recount, how many tell, how much can

I tell you about the many encounters in these places I have

mentioned! They were more numerous than lips can tell—the

rest is silence.

We climbed a certain hill to the top, only to see Agbako
coming towards us from the other side of the hill and, as

soon as I set eyes on him, I cried, 'We are lost!', and when these

travellers to Langbodo asked me why I cried thus, and I told

them, Kako was furious and so were the rest of the fearless

hunters in the group. Before Agbako came upon us, Efoiye

shot an arrow; it hit him but it did not pierce him. He shot

a second one with the same result. He shot a third but the

target did not turn aside. And so on until Efoiye had shot

all his seven allotted arrows which left Agbako still unharmed,
and he came remorselessly towards us. And as he came to

where we were, and Efoiye saw that Agbako turned his atten-

tion towards him, he shot the eighth, forgetting that he must
not exceed seven in a day. This made Sokoti the Smith of

Heaven exceedingly angry; he infused Agbako with strength

from the dome of heaven and he threw confusion among us all.

Desperate, I called upon God and he answered. Agbako fell

and turned into a serpent and twined round Kako, knocking
him to the ground, and he rolled downhill from the top with

Kako. When they reached level ground Agbako turned once
again into a ghommid, upon which Kako summoned all

his strength, lifted him up and smashed him to death. Thus
did Kako slay Agbako and we resumed the toil of our journey.

Many hindrances did we encounter but there is not time to

93



tell you everything, so I will mention just one more episode.

One morning, as we made our way along, I caught sight of

a man who went by the name of Egbin. In fact we began to

smell him even before we set eyes on him. My good friends,

since the day I was born into this world I have never encoun-

tered such a disgusting object as this man. All his toes were

pocked with the jigger and they were so numerous that they

had cut through several of his toes and infested his legs from
the soles to the knees and many of them even came out of

their own accord as he walked. The sores on his legs were

numerous and he covered them with broad leaves, for the

smallest of them was at least the size of my palm, many
of them were left uncovered because these leaves could not

fully cope with their size and they oozed fluids and pus as

he moved. Egbin never cleaned his anus when he excreted

and crusts of excrement from some three years back could

be found at the entrance to his anus; when he rested, worms
and piles emerged from his anus and sauntered all over his

body, and he would pull them off with his hands; when he

wanted to excrete he never stopped in one spot, he voided

as he walked and the faeces stuck to his thighs and stuck to

his legs. Every kind of boil and tumour lined the body of this

man and each one was bigger than my foot, they burst open
on his body and he would gather the suppuration in his hand
and lick it up. Egbin never bathed, it was taboo. The oozing

from his eyes was like the vomit of a man who has eaten

corn porridge, he stank worse than rotten meat and maggots
filled his flesh. His hair was as the skin of a toad, grime from
eternities was plastered on it, black he was as soap from palm
oil. Earthworms, snakes, scorpions and every manner of

crawly creatures came out from his mouth when he spoke

and he would chew on them whenever he was hungry. The
mucus never dried in Egbin's nostrils, this he used as water

for cooking his food and he drank it also as water. My friends,

only this little do I recall about this man, and when he came

94



upon us and began to laugh, exhibiting his rancid teeth to

the world, we begged him kindly to depart and after a while

he went his way. But there was a man, his name was Oto, the

junior brother of Aramada-okunrin, who followed him. He
went with Egbin and up till this day we have never seen hair

or hide of him.

We did not journey longer than three days after this when
we heard the cocks of heaven, and we burst into a paved road

which spread straight towards the dome of heaven. Even as

we entered this road, we met two good-looking youths dressed

in shining white, who when they saw us greeted us courteously

and asked us where we were bound. We told them that we
were bound for Mount Langbodo; this made them very happy
and they gave us directions, saying that the road on which
we were led straight to the dome of heaven and that after

a while we would see the road to Mount Langbodo
— on the

right side of the town gate, with this inscription 'This is

the road to Mount Langbodo; a town of wise men it is.'

They told us further that if we followed the present road and
did not turn at the fork for Mount Langbodo, we would find

that this main road split after a while into two, the right side

to the dome of heaven and the left to hell. They warned us to

be sure to turn at the right moment for Mount Langbodo
because this turning was not far from the dome of heaven,

from where hymns that were sung in heaven would reach us

clearly; that if we were not on our guard we would be drawn
onto the road for heaven and this would result in harsh
visitations upon us, for it is the lifeless form only which
man is permitted to take to heaven. The gatekeepers would
not let us in as we were, and we would end up as food for the

wild beasts or be turned into ghommids of the forests.

Thus they advised us and we thanked them, and before

we had walked some distance heard the singing in heaven.

Ah, how painful it is that I can find no words to convey to yon
the melodiousness of their music; I have never heard the

95



like and we can never encounter such on this earth for all

eternity. The voices were many but they sang as one; there

was such unity. The song was so captivating that, when we
arrived at the turning, we stood still, not wishing to proceed,

and it was during our pause there that a certain man known
as Keke-okun the brother of Olohun-iyo plunged into the

road to the dome of heaven; he ignored all our pleas and even

as we pleaded with him many more among us wanted to go

the same way. So, seeing how we were all affected, Imodoye
asked Olohun-iyo to sing and recall us to our mission, and

he began to sing until the forests resounded and his voice echoed

through the entire neighbourhood. Only then did our minds

quicken to the road towards Mount Langbodo, but how
Keke-okun fared we do not know till this day. Some said that

the fearsome beasts had devoured him, others said that he

was transformed into a ghommid, and others still claimed

that the gatekeepers of heaven took pity on him, cloaked him

in the garb of immortality and admitted him into heaven.

But everyone merely puts forth his own ideas and we do not

know whom to believe. What is most certain is this important

fact—that he departed before our eyes, but we did not witness

his return.

We walked a long time but did not arrive at Mount Lang-

bodo early and, when we were tired and it grew dark, we
slept on the way not knowing that our destination was no

longer far. When we woke up the following morning and

examined our baggage, the food was exhausted and we were

afraid that we would not arrive at Mount Langbodo before

we all died of hunger. This would not have mattered if I

had remembered to take the little cloth which was a gift

from my wife on my second trip to the Forest of Irunmale,

before she departed for her home at the Bottomless Bog.

I forgot the cloth at home when we set out for Mount Lang-

bodo; did I but have it in my possession, a prodigal feast

would have spread before us the moment we demanded food.

96



'Kabiyesi, King to whom honour is due.

97



Be that as it may, we did not walk more than a very short

distance before we arrived at our goal.

Let the truth be spoken, Mount Langbodo is a magnifi-

cent city and a large one. Its beauty is beyond mere tabulation

of details, its highways stretched out like endless lawns lined

in bronze, the walls of buildings were built of mirrors, the

doors of silver and the windows of gold. The king's palace

glowed like morning sunrise, displaying the glory of God; the

king himself sat lightly as a rainbow on his throne, his eye

piercing and straight.

When we arrived at the city we sent to inform the king and

he was happy to hear of our arrival; he ordered that we be

fed and wined, and ordered that we be given clothes gladdened

by sunrise and then brought before him; his servants did as

he commanded and took us before him. When he saw us he

warmed to us and embraced us, he greeted us with joy and we
also honoured him and prostrated ourselves before him,

saying with one voice, 'Kabiyesi, King to whom honour
is due'. And after the exchange of courtesies he promised

that he would help us to bring to a fruitful conclusion the

purpose of our journey so that we could return home happy
and contented to our king. But before he would attend to

these matters we were to go and spend seven days with Irag-

beje whose house had seven wings.

Iragbeje was a singular being and a very wise one ; he was a man
of keen intellect and this sagehood came with him from heaven.

Ogodogo is the potter of heaven and he it is who moulds the

unborn children whom the Creator assigns to humanity

every year. His occupation earned him the name of Ogodogo
for, whenever he contemplates a new finished product of his

craft, he rejoices and gives praise to God saying, 'The glory

of God is apparent, the glory of God is turned to glory in the

body of you, child.' He uttered these words every time and

this led the inhabitants of heaven to nickname him Glory-to-

glory, Ogodogo. When he had moulded the children, he took

98



—

them to Sokoti the Smith of Heaven and both of them would
fire the babies in the large furnace of Sokoti's smithy. When
this was done the children were taken to God.

In the beginning of the world, after the creation of Adam
and Eve our first father and mother, the intention of the

Creator was that after these children were brought to him he

would breathe life into them, and thereafter order that they

be fitted with the smock of immortality in the home of Ogodo-
go, for the dresses in his house are varied; there are those of

immortality and there are others of mortality. And the

advantage that this would have brought us is that we of this

world could not die, and our grandfathers and mothers would
also be alive today. Certain it is also that the wisdom of the

world would be greater; the mighty stone structures which
exist in Egypt till this day which were the brainwork of

several generations past, and many other works of marvel

which still astonish the world and which those who preceded

us achieved through their cleverness would be clear to our
understanding this day. However, the head was ill-fated and
thus deprived the sheep of horns; the evil deeds which our

forefathers committed changed the Creator's mind for him
instead of immortality he ordered that the children who were

destined for this world should put on the smock of mortality

so that the world would be one of taste-it-but-not-swallow

for them. But on the day that Iragbeje was due for his own
smock and he went to the house of Ogodogo to be fitted, he

did not meet the man at home and, rather than await his

return, he entered the clothes store, helped himself to one of

immortality and fled into earth. And, even though God did

not expect Iragbeje to behave in this manner, nevertheless,

according to the course which God had himself plotted, the

immortal fittings which were in the home of Ogodogo had
such predominance over life that Iragbeje cannot die, for the

smock itself is what God's own unique creations wear on the

outskirts of heaven.

99



And so it is that Iragbeje lives in the world but does not

die; that his eyes have seen much in the world and the wisdom
of earth is clear to him. But after a while he grew tired of our

world and he came to Mount Langbodo where he could em-
ploy the manifold wisdoms of his mind.

The house where he lived had seven wings, and the name
of the house was in fact The House with Seven Wings; he

lived in one wing every day of the week; when he stayed

in one today, he stayed in the other tomorrow. And on the

day of our entry into Mount Langbodo, the king sent to let

him know that we were coming to live with him for seven

days. On that day itself, however, it was in the palace that

we slept.

THE FIRST DAY WITH IRAGBEJE IN THE
HOUSE WITH SEVEN WINGS

On the second day, the king ordered that his servants take

us to Iragbeje, and when we arrived he took us to a large room
at the very end of the house. My dear comrades, this room we
speak of was of exceeding beauty; its floor was laid with the

most precious stones, it shone like a mirror and was bright

as a rockpool. In fact when we first entered it we thought

that it had been built in the middle of a lake: the truth was
that reflections from the stones created this illusion—ah, a

most impressive man is Iragbeje.

There was a great variety of seats in this room and each one

glittered like the lightning of heaven. When we entered the

room and were seated, Iragbeje sat on the tallest of these chairs;

we turned our chairs to face him and he began to address

us saying: 'I greet you, brave hunters, I bid you welcome.

Welcome from your long trek, welcome from the many trials,

welcome from the hazards of the road. Did you not meet

Agbako on the way? I hope Egbin did not trouble you unduly?

100



How did you cross the river of blood? And did you not do
battle in the city of birds ? I trust that Were-Orun did not harm
you? And the sand-elves? How did you fare with the wild ani-

mals? Welcome from your tribulations. And the labour of

rendering help to one another, of achieving unity among you;

I salute your bravery, your endurance, your forbearance, your

resolution, I salute your initiative, I greet you.'

We responded heartily even as he welcomed us and, when
we had dispensed with courtesies, he continued with his ad-

dress saying, 'I heard of your arrival yesterday; I heard also

that you would be coming here to spend seven days with me,

and since yesterday I have made arrangements over what we
would discuss during these seven days and how we would enjoy

our time together. According to my plans, it is the subject of

children we shall tackle today, for it is the egg which becomes
the cock, the child is tomorrow's father. I want you to listen

carefully to everything I will now say to mankind in general,

even though I speak as if I address but one man. So, let us begin:

'My dear fellow humans, you who bring forth children,

train your child when he is still a child; remember that he is a

gift to you, and do not let your child be lacking in home-train-

ing, lest you regret it after tomorrow, lest he become a slave

to the child of another, and go from house to house to seek a

decent meal. When your child wakes in the morning, find him
work to do; do not with your own hands spoil him, do not

grant him his whims day after day. When he transgresses,

show him the error of his ways, when he is impertinent, rebuke
him. If you are wealthy, do not indulge your child excessively,

do not use another's child to indulge your own; remember that

it is this indulgence which ruins the child of the rich, so do not

let your child believe that he is the child of a rich man; don't

take any nonsense from him, so that he asks this today and you
grant it him, and he asks another tomorrow and you buy it for

him also, revelling in destructive indulgence, whining for at-

tention and eating ten hunks of meat at one sitting.

101



Remember that the world is inconstant and that you may
become a poor man tomorrow, when a halfpenny will prove

an elder to you. If you are poor, cut your coat according to

your size, do not envy the children of wealth lest you enter

into eternal debt. A man lives according to his means. And,
whether you are rich or poor, be sure that you control your
wife; see that she does not spoil your children. Some wives

improve the behaviour of children but others ruin them,

for there is far too much human kindness in the sockets of a

woman's eyes. Do not permit your child to keep bad company,
that he start from youth to pub-crawl, insulting women all

over town, dancing unclean dances in public places and boast-

ing, "We are the ones who count, we are the elite over others."

Then would calumny stick onto your child and people would
sing, "He drank banana wine and was solidly drunk; he drank
neat palm wine and was solidly drunk; he drank maize wine

and was solidly drunk; he drank the wine, the wine of debtors

and was solidly drunk, solidly drunk, he was solidly, solidly

solidly drunk."

'If you hand your child to another to bring up, examine
carefully what kind of person he is. Many guardians do not

appreciate the value of a child; do not give your child to a

man who is hard as stone, one who will inflict suffering on
your child, nor should you hand your child over to the exces-

sively soft-hearted who will merely spoil him. The grandfather

and the grandmother are risky guardians, beware of them. If

you find that you cannot avoid leaving your child with them
because he will be of great help to them, well, it is not too bad,

do so, but be not too far from the child, watch after your trea-

sure lest it become ruined.

'Watch how your child speaks, rid him of lies, let not un-

seemly language pass his lips; don't let him utter things which

do not go with the stomach, filthy discourse, disgusting words,

boastful words and words which far exceed the language of

children. See that he does not become a hardened thief in your

102



hands and an inmate of prisons after tomorrow. If you have

money educate your children, and even if you do not possess

much, as long as you do not enter into debt and daily food is

not too great a problem, try hard to educate him. If you have

to cut firewood from the bush and sell it, endeavour to bring

the matter to a successful end, bearing in mind that one brill-

iant child is not to be equated with a thousand children who
have no training whatever; he is superior to them. Neverthe-

less, before you embark on this endeavour, see to it before you
begin that you do not stop halfway lest people ridicule you in

the words of the song, "Shame on you, shame on you, you
made the promise but you cannot fulfil it, shame on you."

The ridicule itself is however the smallest part of it, what fol-

lows a hundred and twenty far exceeds a hundred and forty;

the name which your child now bears is worse than it was at the

beginning, he is now a half-educated person. The half-educated

feels ashamed to take up his cutlass, yet the amount of book-
learning in his head is not enough to earn him a living; the

half-educated wants to wear shoes yet his salary can hardly buy
him a buba, therefore understand that if you cannot take it

through to the end it is no compulsory matter: teach your child

some useful trade. If it is farming, let him learn it well; see for

yourself how the black nations are rich in land, it is a gift from
their Creator to their great ancestors; if it is trading, teach him
soundly, and if it is road-building, let him understand it tho-

roughly. Let him not learn a little of this and a little of that,

jumping from one thing to the other, as a man who chases two
mice at once surely catches nothing. This is your time, prepare

his for him; do not take out your resentments on him saying,

"I will do nothing to help you for your mother is ill-behaved

and is herself useless as a person." I want you to know that

even if a child is as tall as an elephant and his girth like a buf-

falo's, a father is still a father. A child has but little sense, it

does not exceed this much. The knack for learning is one thing,

the knack for strutting another; if the moon appears by day

103



;

and the sun by night, the wisdom of the old cannot desert the

aged for ever. Therefore do not drag your interests in the mud
train your child now, that he does not become a worthless per-

son in the world, so that he does not curse you after tomorrow
and you go to meet Death with a broken heart.

'And now the matter is directed at you, youth. Young one,

how is it? Have you forgotten your mother? Or do you not

even remember her at all? I implore you, do not so, lest the

father of hornbills pluck out your eyes for food. When you
were little, hardly bigger than a mouse, it was your mother

who wiped the mucus from your nose, her breasts you sucked

and pulled at anyhow, even biting them, and it was on her

clothes you defecated and pissed upon. It was your father who
took up his cutlass and went after the bark of trees from which

he made your potions, and your parents who ran hither and
thither when you were taken ill. The clothes you have on to-

day, the food you eat, come from them. I ask you, what is

there left which they did not perform for you? It is fitting that

you repay these kindnesses to them; the trade they teach you,

face it, learn it well that it may suffice you and them for food.

And if they cannot afford to send you to school, do not there-

fore be angry, do not covet those whose parents have sent them
to school, remember that the fingers of the hand are unequal;

work hard at your trade, be it farming, clerical, or commerce,

there is not that much difference between them—diligence at

one's employment is the father of wealth. There are children

who are frivolous children, who are never-do-well, who are the

ruination of homes and ungrateful types; their fathers have

gathered firewood and sold it to educate them; their mothers

have gathered wrapping leaves for money to train them, and
when they become people of importance they forget them.

Perhaps this son earns three pounds a month; when his par-

ents ask him for money he gives them a shilling, and when
three months after they ask him for something he replies,

"Why don't you slap me and wrest the money from me? Do
104



you imagine that I pluck money from trees?" Ah, you worth-

less child, better take good care of your parents! Even if they

do not have food worth a penny at home, even if they do not

possess clothes worth a halfpenny, it was within this penury that

they gave birth to you, and the day that they die you will under-

stand that there is no concern as true as a mother's, and the

father of another is never quite like yours. Give honour to

your parents; they gave you birth. Even if you are educated,

even when you become a doctor twelve times over, a lawyer

sixteen times over; when you become thirteen types of Bishop

and wear twenty clerical stoles at once, never condemn your
father. Observe several sons of the black races who are bril-

liant in their scholarship, who have studied in the white man's
cities but who adopt the entire land of the Yoruba as the parent

who gave them birth, who love their land with a great love so

that many wear the clothes of their land, agbada and buba,

love to be photographed in the clothes of their grandfathers;

while others wear the outfit of Ogboni to show that they sub-

mit themselves to the country of Nigeria which is the great

ancestor who gave them life, and show themselves humble to

those who are their elders. I wish to tell you, child, it is your
character at home which follows you outside; you who fail

to give honour to your father can do no honour to the race of

black people, and what then is the meaning of your existence?

'Consult with your father always, and he will regard you as a

wise child. If your parents rebuke you, stay silent, show that

their censure grieves you; never talk back when they censure

you thus. There are certain children who never let their pa-

rents speak without interruption, daughters especially towards
their mothers; when the father speaks one word the child re-

plies two. And children who are even so bold that they raise

their hands against their mother! Ah, how merciful is God, for

were I the Creator, I would command the arm of such a child

to stay up and never come down again! However, such child-

ren are not too common, and it is certain that if they do not

105



repent in time they are asking for the ostrich of God to pluck

out their eyes in the latter days of their life. 1 ask you, child,

do you wish this? Sometimes your parents may wrong you;

be patient, remember that when they approach old age some
of their thinking turns again to a child's. I beg of you, do not

earn the curse of your father, nor cause your mother to exe-

crate your name; the curse of parents when the child is guilty

never fails to hunt down the child.

'I have spoken much about children but I have not yet told

you about the Ajantala type of child, those whose behaviour is

turbulent and whose very nature is turbulence itself. I will not

talk much about them, I will simply tell you a little story, a

most enjoyable story it is, highly entertaining. This is how it

goes:

'Once a woman gave birth to a child, a very beautiful child,

but no sooner was the child born than he began speaking out

loud in these words, "Ha! is this how the world is? Why did

I ever come here? I had no idea it was such a rotten place.

I thought the world would be as spotless as heaven! Ha! Just

look at the pit and look at the mound! Look at the cow-dung

in the middle of the town! Look at dirt in the open. I have

surely had it, I won't be long returning to heaven, no doubt

about that." My brave hunters, it was a baby born that very

day who spoke thus, and no sooner had he spoken than he

rose from the spot on which he had been delivered, permitting

no one to carry him, entered his mother's room and took from

it sponge and soap, scrubbed himself gleaming, wrapped a

cloth around himself and sat at a tense crouch. Not long after

he turned again into the house and before he re-emerged he

ate six large wraps of eko; he would have eaten more but there

was none left in the house. And as he emerged it was a cry of

hunger which preceded him; these goings-on were a wonder

to the whole town.

'Before long the townspeople had heard and begun to arrive

to see for themselves, but the child did not take kindly to them.

106



On the seventh day, when it was time to give him a name, the

parents filled the house with drinks and food spilled onto the

road, and when the moment came to name him, he himself an-

nounced, "My name is Ajantala". From the moment that pre-

parations began for the feast on this day we speak of, Ajantala

had been simmering inside and, after a while, he entered the

enclosure where the cooking was taking place, seized the ladle

and began to stir the stew on the fire; this flabbergasted those

who witnessed it, and they said, "The plantain shoot kills the

plantain ; Ajantala will be the death of his mother. " Such words
of provocation to Ajantala! He seized a whip and thrashed all

those who were busy about the food and scattered them. And his

anger was further inflamed against the others who sat feasting,

he waded into them and nearly flogged them to death; some
well-muscled grown-ups tried to face up to him but his strength

was more than theirs. In the end everyone commenced a rapid

dialogue with his feet, calling on their gods for rescue: the

Christians called to their Saviour, the Moslems called Anobi,

the masqueraders called on their ancestors, Sango followers

called on Sango, Oloya called on Oya. Ah, it was a most inaus-

picious day for the revellers, the confusion was great indeed.

When Ajantala had had enough of the chase he returned home
and began to hiss, muttering, "Do you say you have no sense,

I will teach you all sense." Even as he spoke he entered his

mother's room and smashed six plates; as he came out he

trampled six fowls to death. A man who stood by said, "Ah,
you child, what a cruel one you are!" Ajantala exploded six

slaps in the man's face and, when he and the man began to

fight, a passer-by tried to separate them and Ajantala gave

the man six kicks. When he had done with kicking, he saw
some men playing ayo; he deserted the fight, joined the players

at their game, and defeated them six times. His elder brother

who had observed all these happenings, opened his mouth and
exclaimed, "Ha!" and his mouth tore wide open right to the

back of his head. Ajantala had become a big problem.

107



'My strong friends, thus did this wonder child conduct
himself with violence for a solid month and become a terror

to the whole town and a peril to the public, yet no one could

overpower him.

'There was a babalawo in this town, a most experienced

man and well-versed in magic. From the moment that word
came to him about this child he began to boast, declaring

that there was really nothing to it; the child he said was a

wanderer-child for this was the conduct of the wanderer type

of children. The day he set eyes on the child, everything, he

promised, everything would return to normal; he would
show the child the power of his hand. He prepared himself,

put on his wide trousers and then wore on top of them his

loincloth of charms. He threw a large black agbada over

himself, placed a round cloth cap on his head, filled his ifa

bag with charms and medicines—things such as treated

ores, gourdlets, powder gourds, cowries, beads strung from
the spine of snakes and many other items of that nature,

took up his ifa bag and headed for the home of Ajantala.

When he arrived he met Ajantala at meat, and when he had
greeted Ajantala he sat down talking to the mother. The first

thing that frightened the man was that the food before Ajan-

tala was the food of ten men, and each morsel of the child

that of six grown-ups, formidable. No one could dine with

Ajantala and be full at the end of it. As the man was speaking

with the mother, Ajantala's name came up in the conversa-

tion. "Ajantala" to his own hearing! He leapt up, slammed
a lump of eko into the man's chest, took his bowl of stew and
emptied it on his head, rushed at him and wrapped his agbada
round his neck ; he tore off his ifa bag and flogged his head
with it, flogged him until the bag was torn to shreds, loosened

the loincloth of charms from his waist and set on him with it.

My good friends, when the punishment had truly penetiated

right through to this man's marrow he cried out aloud, and
when he finally succeeded in extricating himself from his

108



'Ajantala rushed at him and wrapped his agbada round his neck.'

109



agbada he left the agbada behind and took to his heels;

Ajantala ran after him, chased him right to his house before

he returned. The man's body was raised in raw weals, nothing

was left on him but his trousers, and he panted for long after-

wards. Later the household came and asked him how it was

over there, and he replied, "On that child's affair, never again!

It is a very brute of a child ; since the day I came into this world

I have never encountered that which I met today. What did

he not do to me! He beat me till I was near to death, he pu-

nished me till I was near invalided, he pulled and dragged me
around as if the next thing was for him to slam my head

against a rock. Ah, that child showed me a thing or two!"

'The affair astonished his audience and they said, "It must
have been truly hard going yonder, that Baba should flee

home in that manner. But did you not take your medicines

with you?" Baba replied to them again, "Medicine or what

else! Is it by the fire that a yam grows hairs? What are you
fooling with? A creature who flogged the hell out of me and
seized my agbada, who turned my belt of charms into a whip

to castigate me, or do you even see my ifa bag with me? He
has seized everything I own in its entirety, nothing saved me
but my luck, so don't you imagine that this child is small

beer."

'One of those present asked again, "But how! And where

is your undervest? Did he seize your hat also?" This angered

the man and he snapped. "Don't you pester me with any

more nonsensical questions; the patriarch was burnt and you
ask me what became of his beard! I say he took everything

I possessed, yet you ask what became of my cap. Do you think

if I had not fled he would not have taken my trousers also?

Look, don't say I didn't warn you, if any of you runs into

him and does not take flight, you are fooling with death.

And if you run home I will push you out again, I'm not letting

anyone bring trouble to lay siege to my house!"

'Thus did Ajantala become a problem at home until the

110



mother could bear it no longer; she took this turbulent child

into the bush, contrived to slip away from him and returned

home, leaving the child in the bush.

'As Ajantala wandered around in this bush he arrived at

a place where lived five creatures in perfect amity—the first

was Elephant, the second Lion, the third Leopard, the fourth

Hyena, and the fifth Goat. Ajantala pleaded to let him live

with them, that he would be a servant to them, and they readily

agreed.

'These creatures took it in turns to seek food every day;

while one foraged for food, the others stayed at home, and
when the food was brought they all shared in it. Thus had
they lived for a long time without any misunderstanding,

that is, until this pestilential child came among them. He
arrived in this place on an evening when it was the turn of

Goat to find food the following day. Ajantala played the

perfect guest the rest of that evening, he did not make trouble

as he was a stranger among them. On the morning of the

following day, Lion called the others together and suggested

that, since they now had a servant, it was only sensible that

whenever one of them went out for food, the new servant

should follow him, and both Ajantala and the other creatures

clapped in approval of Lion's proposal.

'When the morning had ripened a little, Goat prepared,

and went into the bush for food. Ajantala followed him and,

when they had both arrived at their destination, Goat began
to seek food while Ajantala simply played about. Goat was
silent, saying to himself that he would not make an issue of it

at this stage, that the new servant was simply not yet experi-

enced. After he had gathered food and tied it up in a bag,

he called on Ajantala to assist him in setting the bag on his

head, but when Ajantala came to him he seized Goat by the

legs, knocked him flat on his back and began to kick him
until that unfortunate's face was in lumps and lacerations.

Goat cried but found no one to save him and when finally

111



Ajantala was done with him, he warned him, "If you tell

anyone at home that I beat you, then you have truly spelt

your own doom."
'After Goat had rested he heaved up his load and set off,

Ajantala following. When they were nearly at their camp,
Ajantala ordered him to transfer the load to him and he did

so. Before long they reached the camp, and when the other

creatures had taken but one glance at Goat they exclaimed,

"Ha!", and asked what had happened to him. But instead of

telling them the truth he lied and said, "As I was looking for

food I upset a beehive with my head and they began to sting

me; and when I retreated in the opposite direction I ran into

a whole battalion of wasps who covered me up entirely;

this was how my eyelids came out over my eyes, so that you
cannot even see my eyeballs."

'The following day it was the turn of Hyena, and Ajantala

again followed him out. When Hyena returned in the evening

his face was swollen and his skin peeled off in thin wafers

and, when they asked him the cause, he said, "Precisely what

happened to Goat yesterday is what affects Hyena today;

I fear it will happen to us all." Goat stole a covert glance

at him and they both shook their heads, but Ajantala hardly

took any notice of them.

'To cut a long story short, Ajantala gave them all the same
treatment right up to Lion. On the night on which he served

Lion his portion, the five animals met and decided that they

must desert their encampment as the bedevilment was too

much for them. Goat said it was very obvious to him that they

should not prolong the agony but leave the place the following

morning, and this counsel was accepted by them all. Quickly

they packed bag and baggage that same night, ready to de-

camp at the first light of dawn, but all their plans fell straight

into the hands of Ajantala.

'When Ajantala saw that they were all asleep, he wrapped
himself in leaves and entered the packed luggage (remember

112



that Ajantala was not himself taller than a foot and a half).

The following morning early they pressed their feet to the

road in full flight. When they had gone some distance Goat
felt a little hungry, so, planning to steal a little of the food in

their load, he told the rest that he needed to stop and empty

his bowels, that the others should go on and he would catch

up with them; a lie of course, he merely wanted to steal

some food. When they were out of sight he began to untie

the load and, even as he took his teeth to worry the leaves

in which Ajantala was hidden, like the wind Ajantala leapt

out at him and beat him within an inch of his life. He knocked
him to the ground several times over. Ah, it was a day which

Goat would never forget. In the end Ajantala stopped, and
ordered him to tie him back in the parcel and remain silent,

told him also that when he caught up with the others he

should hand the load to Hyena, hoping that the same temp-

tation would come to that one and lead him to Ajantala's

hideout.

'Goat took up the load and stepped out livelily. Shortly

afterwards he caught up with his companions and they con-

tinued their march together. When they were gone some dis-

tance, he asked Hyena to take over the load because he was
tired, and Hyena did so. The same idea as Goat's also occur-

red to Hyena, and soon he also wanted to empty his bowels

of fictitious excrement. The beating which Ajantala gave him
was generous, no one had ever dealt him such punishment
before. He wanted to cry out but Ajantala choked him, yet

this Ajantala was no more than a mere stump. Hyena begged
and begged for mercy but Ajantala did not spare him until

he was thoroughly satisfied. When he released him finally,

he told him to tie him back quickly in the parcel and warned
him that if he did not compose himself at once he would
receive another dusting-down. Instantly Hyena dried his

eyes saying to himself, "The man who climbs a palm tree

upside down will surely find what his eyes were seeking."

113



Even so did this wondrous child beat them all, one after

the other. The last was Elephant and, when Ajantala had
got a grip on him, Elephant took to his heels and Ajantala

sped after in pursuit. Before long they had caught up with

the travellers in front and Elephant and the others shook the

fluff of speed as one might worry out cotton ; the matter became
"if you won't move, clear out of my way!" Each one of them
gave voice to different cries, Goat cried "Mme-e-e!", Hyena
wailed, the voice of Leopard shook the ground, Lion rumbled
like a rainstorm, and Elephant trumpeted.

'In the end Ajantala took a short cut to await them ahead,

and sure enough he came out on the road ahead of them.

He chose a large tree which was by the roadside and climbed

up on it, hoping that when they came beneath it they would
be tempted to rest. Not long afterwards they all arrived in

headlong disorder, and when they came to the tree they decid-

ed to stop and rest, saying that it was quite some time since

they last saw signs of Ajantala. If only they knew it, he was
right above them.

'While they were resting, they began to talk and to revile

Ajantala. They said: to think he is hardly more than a midget,

yet, "If you punch him, it doesn't hurt him, if you kick him
he couldn't care less. Is this not a proper pestilence? Nothing
but our heads can save us from this war which traps a man
in his own house!" Then they turned on Goat and began to

heap abuse on him, accusing him of responsibility for Ajan-

tala's admission into their household. Goat said, "Ha, it

wasn't I." But Elephant told him to shut up and threatened

to stamp him to death, while Lion added, "Especially when
a man is so hungry."

'Goat then rose to take an oath on his life, and he swore

that if it was he who suggested that they admit Ajantala into

their midst, the earth should open and swallow him, but if it

was not he, some agency should bring Ajantala into their

midst to scatter them! Does Ajantala ever miss a cue? He

114



:

leapt down from above and scattered them to the

winds.

'And from that day it came about that Goat fled to human
habitation, Elephant to the home of the black race and to

India, Leopard and Hyena into the depths of the jungle, but

Lion chose to live in the plains. And what was the end of

Ajantala? Did he perchance become a wanderer in the

forests? No, the Creator from his home high up in the

heavens saw the behaviour of Ajantala and knew that his nature

did not fit into the ways of human beings. He sent a message

from his throne and Ajantala was brought to the outskirts of

heaven. This story was so widespread at one time that when-
ever one spoke about a truly vicious character one would say

of the man that he is worse than Ajantala. And that is how
the story goes, may your heads save you from a home-dis-

rupting child, may your shoulders save you from the type

also who sells off the home lest he sell you with your roof.

May your legs and arms keep wreckers of life away from
you that they do not ruin your lives for you.'

Thus did Iragbeje complete his tale. After which he said,

'Stout-hearted ones, too much talking leads sooner or later

to lies; let us begin to enjoy ourselves and take our pleasure

for the little time left before dark, tomorrow we will continue

our converse with a different subject.' After this we began
to eat various foods and to make merry, and the natives of

Mount Langbodo came to visit us. And this was our occu-

pation until it grew dark and we went to sleep.

THE SECOND DAY WITH IRAGBEJE IN THE
HOUSE WITH SEVEN WINGS

The following morning when we woke Iragbeje took us to

a different room which was twice as beautiful as the first one,

and when we were seated as before he began to speak

115



'Yesterday I spoke to you about children, but today I will

talk about grown-ups who are the immoderate type; listen

to how I proceed to address them:

'How now Mister Immoderate, have you now discarded

this behaviour? If you have not yet done so I advise you to do
it without delay, for disgrace is the goal of excess, and the

immoderate is the father of the disgraced ; the elder who puts

on the cloth of excess will wear it to his own humiliation.

We asked Immoderate to call us Sango, he got on the road

and began to call on Oya. We asked him, how is your mother,

and he replied, "My father is at home." But I ask you this,

immoderate one, who set you about these activities? When
a mature person has not the money for tea, he sticks to

corn pap, a man who has not five shillings in his pocket does

not embark on a pound project. A sensible man examines

his pockets before he spends money but the senseless says

that what his comrades have done he must do also, forgetting

that it is the home we examine before we give the child a

name. Ah, you thoughtless one, do you know what your

companion can count upon? Even if today you are not afraid

of debts, when the creditor grips you tomorrow you will

understand that a debt is nothing to be proud of.

'And I wish to warn you also, when a man offends you
and admits his guilt to the extent of this proof, that he returns

to ask pardon, be appeased in time. Remember that it is not

your importance or your fame, nor is it your money nor your

power that brings him to beg your forgiveness, but the love

which he has for you. It is love which the world respects,

not power; if you do not yield with grace you will become
smaller in his eyes and he will dare you to do your worst.

Dying you can hardly die, your head you cannot smash on

the ground, all you would be left is your bag of shame and

you would bear the burden of ridicule about with you. Im-

moderate one, remember that your second name is Start-

what-you-cannot-finish, and the third Mulishness, and if

116



you bear all these names, you will soon enough be condemned
by those who love you; your friends and your close acquaint-

ances whose admonishments have met with your indifference

will not love you any more and will reckon you as nothing;

they will say that you are a worthless man, and when your

affair is in jeopardy some day they will turn their gaze aside.

'Nevertheless I want you to know that there is a difference

between the immoderate and the well-meaning. Everyone

knows the difference between evil and good, the Creator has

given us that talent, therefore if you have resolved to do a good
thing, even if a thousand people tell you not to do it, ignore

them entirely; if they call you names it is not your true name
they give you for you are a good man. And when your efforts

have turned out a success those who have held you in contempt
will give honour to you. Therefore it is cleverness that the

world admires and judgement which transcends every other

thing, judge your intentions with your own values, know what
is right as right, know what is befitting as befitting, do not do
things as an immoderate man and do not act like a creature

without a mind of his own.
'I want now to tell you a little anecdote to give weight to

my words that you may see the end of the excessive man in the

clearest manner. Once upon a time, there lived a lion in a

certain bush, and he was the only lion in this particular place.

This lion no longer wished to exert much effort in looking for

food, for this reason he summoned all the animals in the bush
one day and began to address them thus:

"T thank you all for attending the summons which I sent

out today, it shows clearly that you recognise me as your king.

And you know also that I am not at all a wicked king; even
though I have killed some of you for food before, nevertheless,

I want you to understand that this is not really a thing I take

delight in. Everyone of you has been allotted his diet by the

Creator, and all of us are aware that when hunger enters the

stomach no other matter has place within it; some of you eat

117



leaves and this satisfies you, others treasure fruits for food, nor
do we fail to see how the worthy wall gecko loves his meat.

As you all know, it is among you that I select my meat, and
since I hold you in such deep affection, I suggest that you all

come to some arrangement whereby you will of your own
accord come to me, one by one, to be killed for food. For by

this arrangement you will all be privileged to know when death

comes to your turn, and he whose death is near will be able

to arrange how he spends his remaining hours on earth. Fur-

thermore, you must also be aware that I roar when I am hungry
and without doubt this must constitute great terror to you. If,

however, there is agreement, and each one knows when it is

his turn to die, such roars will no longer exist, and the remain-

ing animals will enjoy my company. This is how I have
thought the matter out and decided to let you hear of it."

'When the lion had finished, his speech simply rendered

reply superfluous. In the end, however, a hyena rose and said,

"Greetings to you good people. I took note of one thing in the

king's address: he spoke about the various types of food which
each and everyone lives upon, and 1 think this was a weighty

point in his speech. However, one thing occurs to me as good
and proper and it is this—that if we arrange to go to the king

one by one in this manner, it is not all the animals in the forest

who should go. A beast like my own self, for example; I do not

think that I eat less meat than the king himself, for even as

I eat wild game so also do I eat domestic ones. The day on which

I do not taste goat meat is a day which simply does not bear

explaining. Therefore I think that if a third of the animals come
to me and the rest to the king for eating, the matter will be so

judicious that the king's name will never perish in this forest.

This is what I see of the matter."

'After him rose the leopard, and he said, "Kabiyesi, king,

this matter which you have brought before us is a straight one,

and the words which were uttered by the hyena also had sub-

stance to them. One thing however I would like to impress

118



upon this gathering, and it is this, if we all tackle the matter as

hyena has tackled it, there is no doubt that few animals will be

left for the king. For if one-third goes to the hyena, I think it is

fitting that a half come to me. For when it comes to killing

game, the hyena certainly is no match for me, and if it is a

question of speed, few animals can outpace me. As for beauty,

well, you can see for yourselves that I am not lagging behind,

for just as there is black on me so there is white. I think that

if we exempt worthies like the antelope and the duiker, few
animals surpass me in beauty. And if it is terror we wish to

consider, I think that it is only in the crown that the king here

surpasses me, for no lesser animal dares stare me in the face

a second time; it is taboo. And as for eating domestic animals,

I devour an entire cow and feel that I have not eaten—what do
I want with a mere goat? Therefore my idea is that all those of

us who are the nobility among the animals should be exempt
from attending the king for slaughter; worthies like the ele-

phant, lord of the trail who shakes the forest like a storm, for

he is a warlord in his own right; and beasts like myself, the

honourable leopard, noble of the jungle, the gentle fear which
rocks the little child; and the hyena also may be exempt for

he is the fourth in command to the king. Apart from these

four, all others will come to the king for slaughter, and I think

we ought to appoint the fox to arrange the names of all the

prospective victims in a book so that each one will know when
it comes to his turn; and there can be no doubt that the fox

will perform this task satisfactorily for he is a man of great

cleverness—I greet you in your deliberations."

'When the leopard had spoken thus the elephant supported
him, and all the remaining animals shouted in approval.

'When the fox made out his roster of names, he put his name
at the head of the list and followed it with others. According
to the table, the morning following upon this meeting was the

time for the fox to report to the lion. Noon came but there was
no fox; evening, and the situation was still the same. In the

119



morning the lion sent for the elephant, leopard and hyena and
complained to them how the fox had failed to turn up at the

appropriate time, and yet his own name had headed the list.

This astonished the three nobles and they sent for the fox

immediately.

'He arrived before long and they all asked him what was the

cause of his act of disrespect. The question had hardly left their

lips when the fox began to give his explanation, saying, "Live

long, prosper well, may you remain father of all beasts until

the evening of your life, may you be saved the attack of hun-

ters, may you avoid the danger of traps, if you are but one step

away from a snare, God will surely warn you. Is it not clear

that it was your love for me which made you assign this task

to me? After all, what am I among all the other animals?

On that day when you mentioned my name in the assembly

I was most astonished, and my prayer is that God should pre-

serve the fire of your love for me from an untimely end, that it

will continue to burn strongly so that, when I die, you will not

fail to take good care of my household. I want you to believe

that I did not mean disrespect to you at all; it was simply the

way events turned out. Do you see that mahogany tree over

yonder?—and he pointed in that direction—even there lies my
home, and do you see that iroko tree in the neighbourhood of

the mahogany?—again pointing to it—by that tree live four

beasts just like you: a lion, an elephant, a leopard and a hy-

ena ; they molest us animals who live nearby, and if you do not

make the effort to get rid of them, hardly any animal will be able

to come to your highness to fill his dinner table.

'This report was of great astonishment to these beasts for

they could not think that there were other creatures in the for-

est like themselves. The lion replied and asked, "Is it indeed a

fact that there is another lion in this forest?" And the fox re-

plied, "Kabiyesi, it is so." And the lion again asked him, "Are

you sure?" And the fox said, "I am absolutely certain; but

this I see clearly, that although these animals are about your

120



own size, they do not match you for strength for, although they

chase me many many times, they are unable to catch me.

And there is no doubt that if you fight with them you will

surely overcome them and, once you have killed them, your

livestock will surrender themselves to you at the agreed times."

'The way in which the fox told his story and the tone of his

voice stopped the beasts suspecting for a moment that he was

lying to them. They all prepared and followed him to where

these animals were lurking.

'He led them all to the edge of a well which was filled with

water and was very deep. When they came to it, the fox pointed

into the well and bade them look inside it where they would
discover the four animals he spoke of. When they looked in-

side the well and saw their reflections in the water, they bared

their teeth and the reflections bared their teeth also. They
tossed their tails with the same result. In the end they resolved

to charge their own images and, even so did they leap into the

well and die, swollen to a dead certainty. This is the end of the

tale; the lion wanted to die the death of water and placed on
his head the load of excess, saying that animals should walk
in to him. I ask you, was that how they walked in to his fore-

fathers ?

'I have now done with the tale of the first immoderate, now
to the tale of the second one.

'When the father of a certain man died, he left him a hundred
pounds. The man used all this money to buy several sorts of

delicate goods, all breakable things like jars, drinking glasses,

all kinds of flasks, mirrors; a variety of dining plates and sim-

ilar objects in which he wanted to trade. One morning he

arranged all these things in a pile before him and, when he had
revelled in the sight, he felt very happy and began to think

aloud: "This hundred pounds of mine is no chicken feed. Is it

not the amount I spent in buying these goods? Surely, if I sell

them, I will make a profit of another hundred pounds and my
wealth will become two hundred. And if I trade with this also,

121



will it not become four hundred pounds ? Surely if I have four

hundred pounds I am truly in the money. How quickly does

a man become rich! If I use this again to trade I will soon gain

another four hundred pounds, and by such imperceptible

means the amount now stands at eight hundred. But if I own
eight hundred pounds have I not truly arrived? Immediately

all men will sound my fame. Even then, the eight hundred
pounds need not remain so, suppose I traded again with it?

Surely it will yield more profit and a mighty profit at that, so

my current standing could rise from this to some two thousand

pounds. As a man worth two thousand, the entire town will

have heard of me, my word will be law, but even if I owned
this sum I would not stop there, I would trade until the two
thousand pounds had become four, then eight, and so on up
until I owned ten thousand pounds in ten thousand places.

If I owned ten thousand pounds in ten thousand places it is

only left for me to feast and dress gorgeously and parade my-
self that everyone may salute me in honour. However, a man
uses money to seek money; before I rest on my laurels I ought

to trade just a little more, so if I used this sum to buy more
goods I should approach ten thousand thousand pounds
in ten thousand thousand places. Only now would I rest

and take me a wife. But who should I marry in this town?
Nothing less than a princess would do. When I have taken her

to wife and she has moved into my house, I shall treat her with

disdain—is she not my wife ? I married her with my wealth and,

princess though she is, it is my money which has brought her

to me; or has anyone seen me approach her father's palace to

beg for food? When occasion calls for it, I will reject the food

she has prepared—this will surely make her unhappy; she will

send for her mother to come and plead with me and, when they

fall down on their knees before me pleading, I shall behave as

if I do not know them. This will pain my wife a great deal, she

will cling to my feet saying, "Please look at me, my husband,

surely you know that I bear a great love for you. I would not

122



intentionally punish you with hunger, it was the rain which fell

yesterday that stopped the wood burning properly and caused
your food to be late today. And I beg you fervently not to

fail to be appeased by the sight of my mother on her knees to

you, nor will I ever repeat the fault; sooner than make you go
hungry I will seek firewood myself wherever it may be found."

Undoubtedly I shall feel some compassion for her, but I ought

to demonstrate my importance so I will kick her, thus . . .

'This man was totally lost in his make-believe, and he kicked

forward even as he said, "Thus", and all the merchandise

which he had purchased with a hundred pounds were smashed
to smithereens. The squirrel ran up an iroko tree and the hun-

ter was forcibly sobered ; this man sobered up very suddenly.

Mister Immoderate had no money yet but he had begun to

kick a princess; if he does become wealthy the world will wit-

ness wonders.

'My good friends, I will next speak upon the twin matter of

had-I-but-known and performing of good deeds. I will only

speak a little on these and lend them weight once again by
moral tales.

'A human fault is had-I-but-known and no one can totally

eradicate the fault; earth would be nearly as beautiful as

heaven if there were no faults on it. It is the very nature of this

fault which has led our elders to coin the proverb, "Tears cul-

minate in a sigh of self-pity, had-I-but-known is the end of tri-

bulation; the elders all confess that the cure for had-I-but-

known is yet to be found. "Forgive me, but such is the proverb.

'About acts of kindness, it is true that men ought to perform
these, but a man ought to know what sort of kindness he ought

to perform and what kind of person deserves his kindnesses.

Some people perform their kind deeds thoughtlessly, simply

because they believe that such conduct is good, they do not

think whether such acts are advisable or not. Anyone who per-

forms acts of charity without thought does ill. A man who has

two arms and two legs and has no deformity on his body, yet

123



cries "Whoever God has given, let him give to me" is not the

kind of man who deserves our charity. The kind of man who
needs our charity is the one whom we see clearly as being

incapable of providing for himself, no matter how hard he

tries, those who have become very old, and the sick who can-

not rise from one spot. Listen now to the story of one man and
learn from it:

'One day a man was journeying to a foreign land and, as he

reached the neighbourhood of a certain town, he saw a leo-

pard in an iron cage. This cage was a snare set by the people of

the town to trap the leopard which had been molesting them.

The cage had been constructed in such a way that, once the leo-

pard had entered it, he could not free himself unless the cage

was opened by some other person.

'When the leopard saw the man he pleaded with him to set

him free, but the man said no. He begged and begged this man
to release him until eventually he said, "How is it? What have

I ever done to you? You think only of today, you do not con-

sider tomorrow. True, the whole world calls me a wicked brute

but I know that I am a kindly animal. You know yourself that

the tongue of mankind is most inconstant, the same tongue

that praises a man also reviles him, and if you were to live with

me for three days you would swear that you wished yourself

no other companion but me, I the incomparable leopard,

noble of the jungle depths, who raises children without pinch-

ing pennies ; and I want you to know also that ifyou do desert me
I will not fail to find one who will take pity on me and set me
free, and when we do meet again where will you hide ? For cer-

tain am I that the eye will not fail to encounter the body after."

'When the man heard all this he said, "It is the truth you

speak, and I understand it even beyond the points you raise.

But even if fear does not actually seize upon one, a man ought

at least to take note of fear. If I now set you free and you leap

upon me and tear me to pieces, what would have been my
own profit?"

124



'The leopard answered him, "If it is only this matter that

bothers you, it is a very small point indeed. Hurry up, time is

flying, open the door and set me free. I will not do you ill at

any time and for ever."

'These seductive words from the tongue of the leopard

made the man forget that matters stood at a confrontation

with death, which is why a leopard may be seen employing

his tongue to smooth his tarnished image. The man went

to the cage and opened it, and as the leopard emerged he

leapt at the man to devour him. But the man pleaded despe-

rately for a little respite to enable him to present their case

to the first five people they encountered, begging that they

submit themselves to the judgement of these five people;

and thus the two proceeded together on the way. Before long

they met a goat, and, as soon as they saw him, the man began

to state his case, telling him how on his journey he had seen

this leopard in an iron cage, how the leopard had begged to

be set free and how after great unwillingness he had heeded

the leopard's desperate pleas and set him free, and how the

leopard had attempted to kill and eat him on the spot in

spite of his great act of charity. When he had stated his case

the goat said, "Slanderers by nature are the men of this world,

they have not one jot of good in their nature. From the day
I have been with my master, I have not known peace of

mind for one single day; when I have just given birth he

takes not the slightest notice, but when I have endured much
to raise my young to adulthood, he seizes them for sale and
goes and squanders the money on his own pleasures. When
he has given me a little banana in the morning he leaves me
to forage for leaves as best I can, he gives me no yam nor do
fried plantains ever pass my lips, and when he has drunk and
eaten, he seizes a stick and well nigh beats me to death.

Therefore there is no good in the son of man, the leopard

must kill and devour you."

'When the goat had delivered his judgement the leopard

125



charged at the man to finish him, but he quickly reminded
him of their agreement which still left the judgement of

four people more, so they continued briskly on their way.
Soon after they met a horse and when the man had stated

his case, the leopard to one side, three of them altogether,

the horse began his judgement saying, "The tongue of men
is as sweet as sugar, but their heart is as rancid as a sixteen-

day old stew. What this man has said may be true, but the

evil man is the ruination of the good. Do both man and
beast not know that I am the gentlest of animals? In spite of

this, it is my very gentleness which human beings exploit

to cheat me. They ride upon my back all the time and I

carry them about, and on days when I am exhausted and
cannot go too quickly they dig their spurs in me and thrash

me with whips to make me race forcibly; sometimes when
the suffering becomes unbearable and I grow very angry,

I toss them off my back and they complain that a horse has

knocked them down. Ah, I fear the handiwork of men, death

is what you deserve from this leopard." And again the leopard

made ready to attack the man, but he reminded him that

there were three more people to be seen.

'They came next to an orange tree and the man again stat-

ed his case, after which the orange tree delivered his verdict

thus, "Your case sounds good, no doubt about that, but

I will never again take the part of you men, you are all no-

good people. Is it not on this one spot I remain for all time,

so that I do no one any ill? In the hot season men come and
sit under my shade, enjoying the coolness; when I am in

fruit, instead of climbing me gently and picking my fruits,

they take stones and hurl them at me, they knock down my
leaves until my body is all tender and I turn into a multitude

of sores. Your cruelty is worse than that of monkeys, there

is nothing for it but that the leopard must kill you." It was
with the greatest difficulty that the man restrained the leopard

after the judgement of the orange tree, and after some more

126



walking they encountered a dog.

'Again the man outlined his case and the dog again heaped

imprecations on the sons of men and adjudged the case as

the others before: there now remained only one person. They
walked some distance and they encountered a fox. With
tears in his eyes the man presented his case: "Dear fox, I

know that you are a truthful person, and I beg you in the name
of God kindly to judge this case as is truly fitting. I was mind-
ing my own business, journeying from home when I arrived

at the outskirts of a town and saw this leopard in an iron

cage. At first I hardly gave him a second glance but faced

my own route and continued with my journey; it was he

who hailed me and begged me most piteously to release him.

I began by declining, saying I would not release him because

he might be tempted to kill me once he was free, and, just

as if I knew it from the start, this very thing is what happened
and now he will not let me go; may God protect us from
deadly encounters! This leopard begged and begged, persist-

ed that I simply must set him free, promised not to harm
me if I did so—but what happened as soon as I did? He
leapt at me with indecent haste, declaring he must devour

me; I only managed to persuade him to let another be judge

of the affair, and this is why you see us thus. I implore you,

save me from this predicament, may kindness never lead to

your destruction."

'When he had finished, the fox gave him a most unpleasant

stare and said, "And is this a sound case you think you have
outlined? Even the things you have stated are unintelligible

to me—can it be you are not aware that you arc standing

before the incomparable leopard? Do you not even tremble

before the noble of the jungle depths? He who raises children

without pinching pennies? If you want me to judge this case

at all you must with greater calm restate your case entirely,

and state it with humility because it is before a Master that

we both stand at this moment." The man began his story all

127



over again and, when he got to the iron cage, the fox stopped

him and repeated, "Do grant me a little patience, exactly

what is an iron cage?" And the man replied, "A cage which

is made of iron." The fox again repeated, "I say I want to

know from you, what is an iron cage?" And the man replied

this time saying, "Fox, I know that you are a very intelligent

man, surely even if you do not know what an iron cage is

you must know what a chicken cage is because your favou-

rite diet is poultry. As a matter of fact, before all this trouble

began, I had reserved two or three fowl which I intended to

send you as a gift because of your good reputation among
animals; they are in the habit of saying, 'A very good person

is the fox.' And my intention still remains unchanged, the

matter remains however in the hands of the leopard, if my
head can sleep on my neck till the next dawn you will most

certainly taste good chicken. If your preference is for mature

hen I shall obtain it for you, and if you prefer a cock, they

are all within my reach. An iron cage and a cage for fowls

are no different from each other than in this respect, one is

made of iron and is bigger than a chicken cage. I am hopeful

that you will have understood this by now, do not fail to

adjudge this case to the good, and may God reward you with

blessings."

'The fox once more replied to the man in a hardened voice,

and said, "You man, do you now turn me into a fowl-stealing

fox? You are a worthless man, stupid, gormless, a nitwit,

forest incendiary, if you don't take me to this iron cage this

day I will not leave you alone, liar!" After which he turned

to the leopard and said, "I make obeisance, worthy one,

whoever shakes a mousetrap only shakes himself; whoever

means you ill will merely harm himself; the animal who asks

just who you are in the forest deludes himself. I crave your

indulgence that you accompany me with your wisdom, that

we may follow this no-count fellow to this iron cage. I want

us to nail him so that he has no escape, and, when I have

128



:

delivered judgement, I shall myself witness your killing and
eating of him." The leopard was very happy and he said,

"Fox, the words from your mouth are delightful, proceed

and I will follow." Thus did all three of them transfer to the

place of the cage.

'On arrival the fox faced the man and said, "Where did

you stand?" The man pointed in that direction and the fox

said, "Then stay there so I can see you. " The man stepped there.

Then the fox turned to the leopard and said, "Save you sir,

where were you?" And the leopard pointed to the iron cage

and said, "It was even here." The fox replied, "Worthy one,

I want you to understand that I am really a most stupid person,

things sink very slowly into my brain. Unless you stand

on the very spot where you were before I cannot comprehend
the matter at all." The leopard briskly entered the cage.

After this the fox said, "Now I begin to understand the mat-

ter." He then turned to the man and said, "You liar, I thought

you said that you released him. How is it that he did not

escape by himself if the door of the cage was thus left open ?"

And the man replied, "It was closed at the time." The fox

again asked, "How?" and the man took the door and fast-

ened it, saying, "Like this." The fox then asked, "And is

that finally all of it, is it certain that the leopard cannot now
escape?" And the man replied, "The leopard cannot escape."

And after this the fox looked at the leopard and burst into

laughter

'"Salutations leopard, you have truly had it now, you will

long remain there, you who make men tire of kindness, the

riverside crow will surely pluck out those charitable eyes

of yours. Go your own way my good man and don't forget

the fowls which you promised me. When you reach town tell

the people that the leopard which pestered them has now
been caged, let them come with arrows and with guns, with
bows and with full quivers, to give this ingrate his recom-
pense."

129



'Thus was the leopard hoist with his own petard, he thought
and thought but could find no way out, the fox needled him
with six hundred jibes and the man with seven hundred. The
calabash of scorn burst over his head, indelible ridicule stuck

to his body, his eyes blinked with rapidity, outwitted he was
and hopelessly floundering. The man did as the fox advised

him and, before long, the people of the town arrived and
slaughtered him. As he was dying he said, "Ah, is this how
miserably I end! If only I had used the grace which God
gave me in a fitting manner, this would not have happened
to me."

'Even so did the leopard regret his sin, but it was too late;

true, he repented, but the matter was already at the conclu-

sion, he stuck the finger of had-I-but-known in his mouth
and awaited what would be his fate. May God protect us

from such belated regrets.

'I greet you, my good friends, I think I have said enough
today, let us spend the rest of the day in mutual enjoyment.'

And so we made merry until nightfall: there remained

five days of our stay with Iragbeje, but I cannot tell you all

the marvels which our eyes witnessed and our ears heard

during these five days, for time is flying. I will go directly

to our experience of the seventh day.

THE SEVENTH DAY WITH IRAGBEJE IN
THE HOUSE WITH SEVEN WINGS AND OUR
RETURN FROM MOUNT LANGBODO
On the morning of the seventh day when we had breakfasted,

Iragbeje took us outside and we did some sight-seeing round

the entire city of Langbodo. It was quite late before we retur-

ned to the house and, when we had eaten lunch, we began

to play—we raced, wrestled, leapt, somersaulted, we climbed

trees and diverted ourselves in a hundred ways. In the

end Iragbeje called us and led us into the only room that

130



was left, for we had gone through the other six in the six

days past. The seventh room was different from all the others;

floor, ceiling and walls alike and every furnishing or article

in the room, were all white as cotton fluff. On entering the

room, Iragbeje gathered us before him, standing, and told us

that we were not to sit down. He himself stood before us,

dressed in a white robe, and began to address us thus:

'We have spoken about many things, but today we shall

speak about our Creator. My good friends, strong ones,

stout-hearted men, you fearless men who bartered death

away in order to do your country good, I want you to know
from this day that when men's tongues have run forwards

and backtracked backwards, if they still do not reckon with

God, they deceive themselves, they indulge themselves in

lies; it is really the seller of beans they see but they summon
the hawker of maize. God is almighty. He is the One who
makes good his word, our Creator. He is King of Heaven,

the Owner of Today, Clean Spirit, the Wondrous One, the

Owner of Life, the Blessed One, the Prince of Glory, Dispen-

ser of Goodness, the Mender of Ills, the Sower of all good
things, Protector and Defender, the One who Alone Is,

and who shall be for ever and ever. And I want you who
have come to Mount Langbodo to listen carefully while

I tell you a short story so that you may understand how mighty

a King is the Omnipotent One.
'There was a king, and a very powerful one; he was rich,

was blessed with children, he had more territory than all

the other kings and was gifted with uncommon beauty, but

his character was evil. He was more wicked than the devil

and more cruel than a monkey, more ill-natured than the

thorns on a thorn-bush, and he spent his days with a perpe-

tual scowl on his face.

'This king had forgotten that character is beauty and beauty

is nowhere else to be found. In spite of his wicked heart,

however, this king was a regular church-goer. One day as the

131



choir was singing in church and the organist revelling in his

art, the king observed that one of the hymns was exceedingly

melodious and that its sweetness far surpassed all other tunes.

But since the hymn was sung in a different language he did not

understand it, so he asked someone to explain it to him, and
the translation went thus: "He removes the mighty from their

throne and exalts the humble above them." My companions,
the king was wrathful, sweat stood out on every pore and
his eyes turned red with anger; if it were possible at that mo-
ment he would have shot the organist dead, if he could have
done it he would have had the entire choir beheaded. He
turned to one of his attendants and said, "Do remind me when
the service is over to teach these heedless fools some sense;

now I begin to understand why the service is always conducted

in some language I do not understand! I see now that it

is only a ploy to insult me. In all the four corners of the world,

where has my fame not resounded ? What monarch does not

know me ? What chieftain dare refuse to reckon with my will ?

God has his own seat in heaven and I have mine on earth.

I cannot remove him from his throne and I am certain that he

also cannot unseat me on this earth."

'Thus spoke this king because he was in comfort. He made
himself an equal to God and forgot his Creator, but God
saw him from heaven and smiled. He spoke to the angel who
stood by him saying, "Learn a lesson from this one, do you
not hear what that undiscerning king has uttered? He has

eaten and drunk to the full and now he has forgotten me. No
day passes but I hear men grow arrogant towards my person,

but rather than be angry with them or inflict grievous pun-

ishment upon them, I take pity on them and remember that

I am their Creator. And what of this one who spoke just

now? Is this not my own handiwork? If I desire to repay

him in the same manner as he has acted towards me, what

can I not do with him? I can turn him to a beast, and I can

turn him into leaves of the forest. I can transform one half

132



of him into animal and leave the other human, I can devise

other punishments the like of which no one has ever seen

to show him that I created him. But I will not do this to him;

therefore, rise quickly and go and take his place, do not harm
him but leave him room to repent: if he does repent, restore

him to his position.'

'The angel heard and did as the Lord had ordered him.

He left Heaven immediately and came to earth. Before a

minute passed after this man had uttered his blasphemy,

the angel had touched him and thrown him into a deep

slumber. After this he turned all his clothes to rags and the

gold at his neck to brass. The angel turned himself into a

likeness of the king, exact on such details of eye and nose so

that nothing looked different from the person of the king,

and he removed the king, placed him in a different spot and
sat in his place, and everyone behaved to him as they would
to the king; none knew that a transformation had taken

place.

'While all this went on the king was fast asleep. When
the service was ended everyone returned to his home and the

church sexton shut the doors while the new king went to the

palace, conducting himself in the manner of the former king.

'In the middle of the night the king woke up, and when he

looked around him he could not tell where he was, so he rose

and began to feel his way around. As he walked this way he

stumbled against a pew, he walked that way and stumbled
on a drum; the whole business was simply beyond his under-

standing, the place was pitch dark and everything turned

topsy-turvy. After a long while he found the door and he

pounded on it with desperation. When the sexton heard he

hurried there to find out what was happening, and what did

he encounter? Some ragged tramp emerged, so he took to

his heels and fled back, believing him to be a lunatic. This

was another surprise to the king, but he turned in the direction

of the palace. On arrival he found that the gates were locked,

133



but some people lay asleep nearby, and the new king the

angel was deep in the heart of the palace. This tramp knocked
on the door shouting, "Open the gates for me", and when
those nearby demanded who he was, he replied, "It is I the

king." The men burst into laughter saying, "Good-for-

nothing drunk." This made him angry and he said, "To whom
do you refer? You will scrub the floor with those same mouths
in the morning." And even so did he continue to trouble them
and speak ridiculously until one opened the door finally

and came out just to see who had been plaguing them. As
soon as he caught sight of the man, he fled back inside and

hurriedly locked the door, saying, "It's a madman, my mother

was hardly born when this one began his lunatic career. If

you go out to him you are surely finished." To cut the story

short, this was where dawn broke on the king the following

day.

'On the next morning he entered the palace and before he

had walked some distance he was seized and taken to the angel

king, for they were convinced that he was a madman. When
the king saw him he took compassion on him, ordered new
clothes for him and explained to the people that he was not

really mad, but was only a jester who was good at amusing

others. And from that day the king turned him into his own
clown and gave him a house to live in within the palace. The
former king could not fathom the meaning of it all, and he

replied saying, "Is this a dream or am I upon the face of

the earth, that I who was a king but yesterday should now
turn into a clown today? These matters are totally beyond

me.
'By casual stages the slip-on piece becomes a dress; a year

passed and there was no change in this man's condition, sad

thoughts plagued him like a debtor. After a while, he under-

stood at last where he had erred and he was gravely smitten

with the fear of God. This day was a Saturday, and on the

following morning the first bells for worship did not ring

134



—

on him in his own house; he was already in the house of God.
When he entered, he fell on his knees and muttered a little

prayer for the forgiveness of sins, and when the singing

began he listened anxiously for the moment when the verse

of that other time would be sung, and when he heard it

"He removes the mighty from their throne and exalts the

humble above them"—he let out such a bellow of anguish

that his throat was mightily distended. My people, it was a

most virile cry for this man had powerful lungs. And when
people began to laugh at him he paid them no heed, saying

to himself, "Laugh if you feel like it, turn cartwheels if you
feel like cartwheeling, I alone understand what is hidden inside

me; I merely bellow today and you burst out laughing, next

time I will roar like a jungle beast before you."

'Soon the service was over and everyone returned to their

homes but this man stayed behind. When he saw that the

church was completely deserted he went near the altar and
knelt, he pressed his face humbly to earth and prayed pas-

sionately to God. Later, he returned home.
'Not long after he had returned to his own house, the angel

king sent for him and he went. When he appeared before him,

the king ordered those who were with him to leave and
they obeyed. When they were alone he rose from the throne

and shut all the doors of the house and the windows also,

and the room was pitch dark. The hearth leans back and
watches preparations for fire, the bat leans back and contem-
plates the behaviour of birds; our man stood in the dark and
waited for whatever was to befall him. Shortly afterwards,

he heard the tramp of footsteps around the house, like the

footsteps of a thousand men—the floor of the house and the

walls began to tremble and a gust blew through the house
with a great noise; it was time for the angel to reveal himself

as the messenger of the God of Glory. Afterwards came a

deathly quiet and a great light shone about the house, and when
he looked up he saw the angel; he had transformed himself

135



back into his own form, and revealed himself as the messenger
of God. His clothes were white as snow, his eyes lustrous as

precious stones, his skin clear as a child's and the shoes on
his feet gleamed like bronze. The old king was greatly frighten-

ed, he fell to the ground and covered his face with his hands.

The angel opened his lips and spoke:

"T am one of the seven angels who stand before the Lord.

When you had fed well and drunk fully, you forgot He who
created you—did you imagine that He could not see you?
There is nothing upon earth which God does not see, nothing

that happens in heaven which He does not know, for did He
not create all things? But you set yourself high and began to

behave like an unthinking man, you talked the language of

the undiscerning until your Creator was angry with you. He
called me and sent me to take your place, but He forbade

me to kill you; and if you repented and turned back from your

sinful ways, He said, I may restore you to your place. Inas-

much as you have today repented, his displeasure is ended for

He is a merciful God. Therefore do I order you now, in the

name of the God of Hosts, rise, ascend your throne and con-

tinue with your reign; if you employ well this grace, you will

stay long on the throne, but if you abuse it God shall seize

the throne from you." As the angel finished his words, he

returned to his home in the dome of heavens and the king

found himself back on his throne as in previous times; great

was the awe of God upon him.

'And thus ends the tale, my friends who have come to visit

us at Mount Langbodo; the hunting dog cannot catch his

quarry and promptly forget its owner, we do not deck out

a horse in glory and have him forget us; whoever forgets his

benefactor throws away the benefits of tomorrow. Therefore

when it is good for us, let us remember our Lord.'

When Iragbeje had finished his tale, he told us to begin

to pack our effects that we might proceed to the palace, for

we were to set off for home the following day. We got ready

136



and by seven o'clock on the seventh day of our stay with

Iragbeje in the House with Seven Wings, we went to the palace

of the king of Mount Langbodo.
On arrival we sent to the king who ordered that we be taken

to the open grounds in front of the Court which had been

lit up with myriad lights and was bright as daylight. He came
himself at eight o'clock exactly and, when he had greeted us,

he sent the following gifts to our king: six diamond rings,

six gold chains, six beaded crowns, six velvet cushions, six

household ornaments, and six bibles in six different languages.

And, in addition, he gave us a letter which was written in a

mixture of liquid gold and silver to deliver to the king, and
these were the contents of the letter:

'Mount Langbodo, The Twenty Second Day of the

Seventh Month in the Year Nineteen Hundred and Thirty

Three after the Death of Our Lord.

To the King of the Nation of these following brave

men—Kako, Imodoye, Akara-ogun, Elegbede-Ode, Efoiye,

Aramada-okunrin.
Your Emissaries arrived here in good health, we

rejoiced greatly when we saw them. I send you some
small gifts in sixes, as is the custom of the Yoruba in

days gone by and at other times even in the present age;

I do this as a king who, with the symbol of six, seeks to

draw you closer in my affection. My counsel about the

progress of your land is this, let the people of your land

love one another that they may value self-respect. If they

hold dear the dignity of their persons they will not

thieve, they will not gossip, they will not be false, they

will not be disobedient, they will not be arrogant; the

children will hold their elders in honour, the elders will

look after youth, there will not be found one blame-worthy
trait among them; and they will love God and love

you also.

137



Give my good wishes to your people.

I am,
Yours in truth,

The King of Mount Langbodo.'

We slept at the palace till daybreak, and in the morning
of the following day the king made us gifts of many things,

and we turned our feet into the road, headed for our home.
I will not tell you of the various adventures of our return

journey for they are too numerous. Doubtless it will sadden

you to learn that it was not all who set out from Mount
Langbodo who returned to our homes. And how did it happen
thus ? Many perished through simple conceit. The dupe of the

world is the conceited man; he thinks that only when he

struts and shows off does the world respect him, he little dreams
that this is the very time that humiliation will reduce him. If

a man overreaches himself, he crashes to the ground; if a

house is overweening, it soon disintegrates; if a town is

vainglorious, quickly will its disruption occur; if a nation

is self-satisfied it will soon enough become enslaved to another;

if a powerful government preens itself, before a bird's touch-

down its peoples will disperse before its very eyes. When
the delegates of Mount Langbodo were smitten with this

arrogance, they listened no longer to the suggestions of others,

amity had fled them and everyone behaved as he wished.

But according to the habit of our Creator, He employs two
methods to punish the sinner, either He punishes him imme-
diately or He notes down his sins in the record book. But

with these men He did not adopt the latter method—instant

was their punishment. When we got to the river of blood, we
met the ghommids at play, for that was the day on which

Olokun who is the guardian spirit of water celebrates his

festival. Kako went to these ghommids and began to play

with them; we warned him but he would not heed us. After

a while the ghommids went down to the bed of this river of

138



blood and Kako followed them. To this day we have heard

no news of him. Efoiye and Elegbede-Ode said that they

wanted to do a little hunting; they became ghommids in the

forest and we never saw them again. And, when we got to

the seven wailing women, Aramada-okunrin sat by them and
declared that he would not continue with us, but Imodoye,
Olohun-iyo and 1 returned home safe and sound, and we
gave thanks to God.
When we returned, many of those whom we had left behind

were dead, and those who remained did not even remember us

for we had been gone a long time. When we came to the king

he had aged a lot, his sight was uncertain but, when he remem-
bered who we were and we showed him the gifts and the

letter from the king of Mount Langbodo, he rejoiced greatly,

embraced us and made us welcome. He gave us many gifts

and from that day of our return we became men of means.

And thus ends the story of our journey to Mount Langbodo.
My friends, herein ends all that I mean to tell the world

at this time. I want you to use this story as a mine of wisdom
that your lives may be good. And so, fare you well, the native

returns to his dwelling.

Thus did the man end his story and we saw him no more.

But we found a little scrap of paper on the floor, and on it

were the words 'Akara-ogun, Father of Born Losers.'

You men and women of Yorubaland, the wisdom of others

teaches us not to think an elder a madman—put the story of

this book to wise use. Each of you meets with difficulties in

the world, each of you has his Mount Langbodo to attain,

each of you has obstacles in front of him, for as there is

sweet,,so there is sour in this world; if today is good, tomorrow
may be bitter, if tomorrow is bitter the day after may be like

honey. The key to this world is in the hands of no man, as

you pass through your journey in the world, meeting with

139



!

good luck and encountering the bitter, accept everything

cheerfully, behave like men and remember that God on
High helps only those who help themselves.

My story is ended at last, let it receive solid kola and not the

segmented, for the first is what secures a man to this world while

the latter scatters him to the winds. And so, adieu for a little

while, I have a feeling that we shall meet again before long;

let me therefore utter a short prayer and then raise three

cheers—the world shall become you, your nation will wax
in wisdom and in strength, and we black people will never

again be left behind in the world. Muso! Muso! Muso
I trust you have enjoyed this tale.

140