






Expedition  to the Mount of Thought
(the third saga)
Being a free translation  of the full 
text of D. O.lFagunwa ’s Yoruba  novel  
IRINKERINDONINU  IGBO ELEGBEJE
By
Dapo AdeniyI,






First  published  1994
© Dapo  Adeniyi  1994
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication  may be 
reproduced  or transmitted,  in any form  or by any  means,  without  
prior  permission  of Obafemi  Awolowo  University  Press  Limited.
Printed  in Nigeria  by:
Johnmof  Printers
Orisunmibare  Avenue,  Old Ife Road  
Agodi  P.O. Box 36012.  Ibadan.Published  by Obafemi  Awolowo  University  Press  Ltd., Ile-Ife,  
Nigeria.
Cover  design
, F27
/All illustrations  by Kayode  Tejumola  
by Kayode  OlanipekunISBN 978-136-102-4






Contents
Acknowledgement  . .
Translator ’s Forenote  .iv
V
Irinkerindo  comes  in .....................................................   •
Journey  begins  to the Mount  of Thought,  in the Forest  of 
a Thousand  and Four  Hundred  Deities ...................... 24
The town  of Edidare  where  Double-foolishness  is king 
over them ...................................................................
Triple-foolishness  ascends  to the throne,  small-pox  
snatches  Double-foolishness  away ............................. 72
Melancholy  and Pride  with Precious  Tongue,  his wife ... 81
Inherited  Lunacy  of the household  of United  Fools  ....  105
Irinkerindo  weds  the niece  of the Lord  of Seas . . . . . 114
The town  of Falsehood ......................................   .149
The war of the outskirt  of the forest  of Elegbeje  . . . . . 161












ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
One of the first people  to hear of this project,  who received  
it with great enthusiasm  at its earliest  attempt,  was no less a 
person  than my predecessor  himself.  Professor  Wole Soyinka.  
One of the marks  of which  was his acceptance  to look through  
and offer suggestions  on the first chapter  that I had completed  
then. His encouragement  and interest,  coupled  at times with 
provision  of stationaries  for the work lasted  all the years spent  
on it. I have also to acknowledge  Professor  Akin Isola, whose 
prompting  and especially  his recommendations  to institutions  
and individuals  have largely  urged  the spcedy  conclusion  of the 
work,  particularly  at moments  when  1 might  have despaired.
Much is owed Drs. Biodun Jeyifo, Femi Fatoba, Niyi 
Osundare,  S.O. Babayemi  (Now Kabiyesi the Oba of 
Gbongan),  Akin Oyetade,  Oladipupo  Fagunwa  and French  
translator,  Etienne  Galle. There also are Mrs. Folabo  Ajayi,  
Professors  Bolanle  Awe, Femi Osofisan,  Jurgen  Martini  and 
James Gibbs.  These friends  in Osogbo,  Ibadan  and Ife also 
helped  to question  some of my complacencies:  Bayo^Adeleke,  
Gochua  Okejoto,  Bose Agboola,  Dave  and Silvia  Olomu,  Akin 
Oluyide,  Yinka Adegboye  (Bob Tay), Ranti Qsunfowora,  
Kunle  Ajibade,  Sesan  Ajayi and Dele Momodu.  I acknowledge  
the patience  of my typist Mr Simeon  A. Adegoke  and IFE 
HUMANITIES  SOCIETY  which flattered  the effort by 
including  it in Fagunwa ’s official  biography.
V







TVanslator ’s Forenote
The very first version  of this translation  was begun  over ten 
years ago, and it was preceded,  partly spurred  also, by my 
encounter  and subsequent  obsession  with a copy of Soyinka ’s 
translation  of the first in the series of Fagunwa ’s classical  
novels - OGBOJU  ODE NINU IGBO IRUNMALE  - of 
which  this is the third.  In the months  that followed,  a colleague  
at the Osogbo  branch  of the Oyo State Arts Council  where 1 
worked  then brought  a weather-beaten  copy of some Yoruba  
novel to work and abandoned  it on the desks to gather  dust.  
This, without  my suspecting  it, was IRINKERINDO  NINU  
IGBO ELEGBEJE,  stripped  bare of its cover pages leaving  
out the actual  passages  of prose,  from the first page. And since  
this particular  day happened  to be an idle day for me, I 
occupied  myself with savouring  the text whose opening  
paragraph  I had translated,  mostly  in my head, before  I even 
knew  who its author  was!
This history  is essential  to the reader ’s understanding  and 
perhaps  sympathy  with many of the choices  I have made.  
Moreso  with specific  moments  in the body of the work where  
there are occurrences  of linguistic  types reminiscent  of what  
appears  in the preceding  translatory  work. Two reasons,  I will 
confess,  are responsible.  One is the earlier  obsession  with the 
translation  I spoke  of, at a far more  impressionable  age. During  
the intervening  years when I went through  revisions  of my 
whimsical  drafts,  I discovered  that what I might  be inclined  to 
consider  as childhood  errors were indeed having their own 
unobvious  advantage,  very significant  to D.O. Fagunwa ’s 
peculiar  universe  recaptured  in this book and we will also 
notice,  in all of his prose works. I reminded  myself  that the 
same  hand afterall  composed  the trilogy  and two novels.  So, the 
influence  from which I might have extricated  myself  would  
serve to reinforce  their cosmological  ties and peculiarity  of 
style. This is why I have retained  phrases  like ‘dog-cared ”, 
“pressed  my feet on the road ” and “laid his tongue  to that are
vii






in actual fact my predecessor ’s transliterated  equivalents  of 
precise  Yoruba  tonal and semantic  constructions.
There  again arose the problem  of strangeness  posed  by the 
author  s constantly  re-surfacing  non-human  yet near-human  
figures  which though  are natural  inhabitants  of their Yoruba  
environment  are completely  unfamiliar  to a new linguistic  
surrounding;  personae  such as iwin, anjonnu,  ebora,  emi etc. 
for which Soyinka  himself  could conceive  no other avenue  for 
escape than to resort to “inventive  naming  ceremonies ”. I 
simply  appropriated  those inventions  - ghommid,  elf, spirit,  
daemon  - to augment  my sparse  additions  of sprite, deities  
and gnome;  a more convenient  alternative  to delving  into fresh  
naming  ceremonies  of my own that are likely to render  them  
even more obscure,  particularly  to readers  who have been  
familiar  with the earlier  effort.
In my prefactory  note to the excerpt  printed  by the journal  
MATATU,  I made  elaborate  comments  on the web of threads,  
beyond  just language  now, that spreads  dowii the length of 
Fagunwa ’s major works,  particularly  the trilogy.  There  I tried  
to draw an accurate  map of Fagunwa ’s fictive  world  where  the 
actions  in all his sagas  occur — a human  world  on one side and 
an imaginary  heaven  on the other whilst the lofty fantastic  
forests  are placed  squarely  in-between.  Many  times  a character  
in one narration  is either to be re-encountered  in a future  
narration  or simply be a paternal  relation  of others there.  
Likewise  a Fagunwa  forest in one story will likely be a 
geographical  neighbour  to other  forests  in another,  not to even 
mention  events.  So a translator  strives  to keep  faith not with the 
one immediate  work alone but with unity of space, time and 
events  enclosed  in a collective  world  of five novels.  Therefore,  
it serves the purposes  of both convenience  and propriety  to 
keep the English  alternatives  of names  of people  and places  as 
they occur in Soyinka ’s work in order to affirm these  
inter-locked  consanguinities.
Very  many  obstacles  to translation  emerge  which  can not all 
be mentioned,  without  my having  to write  a separate  book.  One 
viii






is in the mere fact that Fagunwa  here insists  on a more farcical  
edge that enables  him to drum more  with words  than in any of 
the previous  works.  Thus he enforces  on me the responsibility  
of not merely  translating  meaning  but also of translating  tones.  
There was another problem with the word Elegbeje.  
Translation  at once exposes  the morphological  constituents  of 
this word which is otherwise  secure in its Yoruba  original.  
Elegbeje  has two components:  the prefix El, and egbeje,  a 
numerical  figure.  Precisely  one thousand  and four hundred.  So, 
put together  it becomes:  of or that of, a thousand  and four 
hundred.  Well, four hundred  v/hat? egbeje  kini? Is it egbeje  
iwin, egbeje eranko, egbeje anjonnu  or what? Hence my 
introduction  of the supplement,  imale, deities;  igbo elegbeje  
thus reading  in English:  Forest of a Thousand  and Four  
Hundred  Deities = igbo elegbeje  imale, a subtle hint at its 
relationship  with Igbo Irunmale.  I am protected  by the fact that 
the story-teller  himself  tells us that, the same path leads up to 
both the forests  of Irunmale  and Elegbeje.
Soyinka ’s complaint  about the undulating  tempo of 
narration  becomes  even more evident.  But it has not been in 
vain: every translation,  especially  from a tonally stressed  
background,  loses something.  But it gains too in other ways.  
For a translator  however,  the motivating  word is - resolution.  
Readers  also will need no less be resolute  in order  to penetrate  
the walls  of a narrator  so exquisite  and distinct:
Dapo  Adcniyi  
Lagos,  1992






; IRINKERINDO  COMES  IN(Marvels  fill the world  over, there  is no king as God. He has 
in his charge  all things  on Earth  and the Heavens;  the universe  
itself  is cause  for wonderment.  The earth  is filled  with men with 
two limbs  and four-footed  animals,  snakes  which  tread  on their  
breasts  and fishes of the rivers, birds that chirp as flutes  
including  also the chameleon  whom God clothes in the
I colourful  tweed. Highlands  and lowlands,  the sun and the 
i moon,  the clouds  of the sky and earth ’s soil, these all remain  
,4 wonders.  So also is the art of speech  the source  of separate  
puzzles;  those things which 1 heard sometunes  past are the 
same words  1 have resolved  to relay this day unto you sons of 
men. And 1 exhort  you, as 1 am about  to tell them all to you, to 
let them course  round  the corners  of your skulls,  to an extent  
that all of you hearing  the words  will let them serve as a meal,  
especially  you who are school  children,  enjoy  them  therefore  as 
a distinctive  chickcn-stcw  that a lovely  lady prepares,  which  she 
has seasoned  well.
It all began  in the midnight  one memorable  day. I heard  the 
sudden  growl of thunder,  which  warned  about the coming  of 
rain. I rose from my bed and peered  outside,  all about was 
impenetrably  dark despite  the fact that it was the season  of 
moonlight.  It appeared  as though  the skies  had resolved  in their  
own hearts  to desist  from shedding  light on mankind.  The fowl 
had fallen into a deep sleep, cold breeze blew softly and 
rodents  were feasting  on food-wastes  in the backyard,  had a 
man not tuned  his ears to listen attentively,  he would  scarcely  
have heard their mouth-movements.  The owl wailed at 
intervals  and 1 also discerned  the voice of the brown  bird.  
Behold,  the bats fanned  my head with their wings, this was 
because  they expressed  their own pleasures  in the midnight.  
Even as 1 kept watch,  lightning  flashed  sometimes  and places  
which  I failed  to see previously  came clearly  to my sight. And 
soon 1 fell to thinking,  turning  myriad  thoughts  over in my 
mind, 1 did not really  know  the moment  when  words  began  to
1






burst  forth  out of my lips and I began  to speak  out aloud  thus:
‘Benefits  on this earth are unevenly  distributed:  the farmer  
eats all he desires  in his own farm-hut  while  the labourer  seeks  
gari about  the roadsides;  the king luxuriates  in his throne  while  
the poor cannot  purchase  a chair; a man with a hundred  bags 
of money  struts  over the face of the earth  while he who cannot  
call a penny  the fruit of his beggary  also takes  himself  about.  In 
the very hour which some people  have set aside for dancing  
and big rejoicing,  other  people  will be plagued  with wailing  and 
will be brimming  with sorrows.  Ah, God ’s wisdoms  transcend  
the understanding  of men ’.
I was hardly  done with speaking  when somebody  began  to 
reply  me below  the window  in the following  manner.
‘It is the truth which  you speak  and these really  should  not 
present  much surprise  to you. Worthy  friend  of the window,  if 
matters  had stood differently,  all living creatures  would have 
resigned  into self-contentment  and the progress  of mankind  
would  have been still as a pond.  The very day a man addresses  
himself  saying  that his achievements  in the world are enough,  
his well-being  is on end. He who resides  on ihLs earth and fails 
to prepare  himself  for progress  is like a dead man amongst  the 
living.  If the world  was flooded  with excitement,  men would  not 
have learnt  to commit  sorrow  to writing;  if the world  was full of 
money-bags,  men would  hardly  have understood  the place of 
poverty;  if the world were all victory,  scarcely  would men 
master  the art of adapting  oneself  to moderate  rejoicing  at the 
event of overcoming  difficulties.  Therefore,  my good  
companion  of the window,  the creator ’s thinking  was well 
measured  before  he set about  creating  man as he has done ’.
I was gripped  by fright when I heard these words.  I pray 
God protect  us from the hands of that unexpected  stranger  
who replies  a man in the middle  of the night.  Even as the man  
approached  the close of his discourse,  there came  a bright  spark  
of lightning  and looking  in the direction  of the sounds,  I caught  a 
glimpse  of him. He stooped  by the wall of the house,  clad in 
hunter ’s shorts  and vest, and rested  his gun to the wall.
2






Even as the man approached  the close of his discourse,  there  
came  a bright  spark  of lightning.
3






This I failed to comprehend.  Even as I began to consider  
demanding  what he was all about, a heavy  rainfall  began  and 
the man rapped  on my door calling,  ‘friend,  open this door to 
me’, whereupon  I went to ease the bolts of the door to admit  
him in. He had stepped  fully inside  before  I began to realise  
what eminent  personality  it was. This is because  the face of a 
thief  differs  from  the face of the well-disposed  and the words  of 
the lips of a bandit  from the words  of a hunter,  slaughterer  of 
elephants.  I greeted  him and he himself  responded  warmly  with 
salutations.  I offered  him a chair and he took his seat. I also 
chose  one for myself  and proceeded  to place  my buttocks  on it 
when he begged  the favour  of a drink. So I rose and fetched  
him a cup of water.  After he had drained  it to satisfaction,  I 
lowered  into my own chair and turned  to face him. And as I 
began  to consider  asking  how it came to be that he emerged  
thus out of the night,  he himself  began  to speak  the words  that 
follow:
‘All things  over the earth have their reasons  for coming  into 
being:  as trees have their roots, so do rivers  their sources,  the 
cockerel  traces  its origin to the egg — your seeing  me in this 
particular  hour of the night is not without  its own cause.  I am 
the man who answers  to the name Irinkerindo,  the one who 
wander.s  north and south, whose abode is in the House of 
Wandering.  It is some time now since I began my search  for 
you and hardly  is there any single  place on this earth which  I 
have not yet explored  during  the course  of my searching.  It was 
my father  who suggested  it, long before  his death,  that I seek 
you everywhere,  so that I might  relate  all the things  which  my 
eyes have encompassed  to you, that you in turn may pass them  
on to the sons of the world,  and more wisdoms  be added  unto 
them. It was only this night that I came across  someone  who 
directed  me here, and this has led to my arriving  here today.  I 
would have considered  entering  the house long before  your 
detection  of my presence,  only that I thought  better of it. 
although  indeed  I arrived  town in the night. I am most pleased  
■' b.now  you today.  May God grant us a long life, this event of 
4






our first meeting  convinces  me that we shall be good friends  to 
each other,  for if indeed  we had known  each other  long before,  
you could  not warm  out to receive  me more  than you have  just 
done.  I am grateful ’.
Those  were the words  of Irinkerindo,  and when I observed  
that he was coming  close to the end of his speech,  I also 
countered  him with a brief  response:
‘Irinkerindo,  my friend! It is not you whom I set my eyes 
upon in this hour! I am very thankful  to God. It is a long time 
now when news of you began  to come to me and I had always  
been full of the desire  to meet you. Tales of your wandering  
over the surface  of the earth in pursuit  of wisdom  have since  
been coming  to my ears, neither  have I missed  a bit of the 
numerous  fables  which recounts  the amount  of affection  your 
father bore towards  you. Your fame has spread  through  the 
whole earth, but joy fills my heart today over our union  
together.  Concerning  the prospect  of committing  your story to 
the record,  that is a small matter  indeed.  We shall attend  to 
that in the morrow.  Before  break I will gather  all my writing  
materials  and be fully primed  to take them all down  as is most  
fitting.  I bid you welcome  from a long  trek’.
And so did I speak to the man that night, but since it was 
only I who remained  awake  in the household,  I warmed  some  
stew and made food for him. After he had filled himself  
roundly,  I allotted  him a room and a coverlet,  after which I 
bade him goodnight  and retired  towards  my own bed.
Early to bed, early to wake up. It was 1 who woke last in 
our house  the following  morning.  When  we had breakfasted,  I 
sat at my table and gathered  my writing  things.  This done, I 
called on my visitor  to sit with me, bade him commence  his 
narration  which  I began  to take down.
‘My good friend,  do not forget any of these things  which  I 
begin presently  to relate to you for ever. Place them all in 
reserve.  All things  on earth  have their own end. The end of the 
morning  is noon, the afternoon  ends at dusk and death  
approaches  the end of a man. Even so is it true of food whose
5






end is in the pit. The end of a double  hundred  rainfall  is a 
double  hundred  dryness,  the river seeks  its own end to sea. So 
also is a man ’s character  his actual  end. The one who treats  his 
neighbour  with kindness  merely  sows the character-seed,  and 
when he begins  to harvest  fruits, the eyes of the evil-doer  will 
merely  twitch  in vain. The generous  man soon discovers  his end 
to be crowded  with generosity  while shame  presides  upon the 
end of the pinch-penny.  The open-handed  man is of the 
nobility  and open-handedness  docs not lead a man to poverty.  
The secrets  of the open-handed  man would  never be revealed  
to the world even if the earth shrank  to such extent that it 
comes  to the size of a palmwine  gourd.  Even then it must be 
noted  that squandermania  differs  from open-handedness.  The 
wastrel  is one who losses his head and throws  his possessions  
unwisely  all about:  it is regret  that presides  upon the funeral  of 
such men. But despite  all of this, the extravagant  man has his 
own merits  apart. He can afford  to fill his own stomach  with 
food while the miserly  proceeds  to add water to ten days-old  
stew. All the resources  which you have expended  since my 
arrival  yesternight  have not escaped  my notice.  But this seed 
which  you have just sown must yield its fruits someday.  May 
God  grant  that our friendship  be a lasting  one’.
Seeing  that the man was pausing  in his address,  I hastened  
to add a brief  response:
‘Irinkerindo,  I thank you most heartily.  But is it really  
possible  to act Ifa, the oracle of divination  in a stage-play  
without  one’s behaviour  coming  close to that of the palm-nut?  
The man who travels  countrywide  mu.st embody  within  himself  
a whole  load of knowledge  and understanding  which  surpasses  
that of one who restricts  himself  to his own house.  And even so 
is the diligent  farmsmah  a figure  of little dignity  in the eyes of 
the towns-people.  As I pointed  out to you previously,  it is a 
long time now since  your fame  began  to resound  to my hearing.  
The words,  ‘irinkerindo  is full of wisdom,  Irinkerindo  is a man 
of wisdom ’ are in the mouths  of all the people.  What inspired  
my thanking  you over your words  is this: ingrates  fill the world  
6






to the brim. They are like green  snakes  in the midst of men.  
Would  you easily  conceive  of a man to whom  one lends  a huge  
sum of money  as a result  of difficulties  in which  he finds  himself  
actually  turning  round  afterward  to proclaim  one a senseless  
wastrel?  Yet men of this sort cover the whole  surface  of the 
earth. They are like stumbling  blocks on the path of those  
coming  behind.  They have desecrated  the frontline  and those  
who encounter  them once will hardly  consider  assisting  other  
people  in the future.  But then I must counsel  that we do not 
resort  to evil for the lone reason  that such evil- headed  fellows  
have crossed  our path, lest it becohie  that we hew men apart  
when indeed  our intention  is to mow down a tree. If we 
separate  ourselves  from the act of goodness,  we would  
eventually  discover  ourselves  doing  harm to the kind-hearted.  
We should  only watch  how we dispense  our kindness  lest we 
appear  like fools, wearing  a chain  of gold round  a pig’s neck.  
We must extend  our diamond  to them only that recognise  its 
value.  Extensive  speeches  lead sooner  or later to hes, my words  
will not be lengthy.  I appreciate  your gratitude  but I have not 
performed  much  of the laudable  act in ensuring  your comfort  
as yet, especially  when compared  with those of hundreds  of 
people  who have found  their  path into this house ’.
So speaking,  I retired  and the man took over from me to 
commence  the full account  of his life.
Indeed,  I am Irinkerindo  and my home is in the House  of 
Wandering.  Akara-Ogun  and I are relatives,  this is the man 
who came  to you before.  We are age-mates  also. My own father  
replied,  to the name  Oyindayepo,  he was himself  the chief  of the 
household  of Wandering.  Oyindayepo  took Eni-aye  to wife, she 
was of the same  compound  as Akara-Ogun  and needless  to say 
that it was she who mothered  me. That very period  when  
Akara-Ogun  and others  were getting  prepared  for the voyage  
to Moimt  Langbodo  it was when  the need arose for my father  
to despatch  me on a particular  errand  to a distant  country.  
Eni-aye,  my mother,  was displeased  about  this errand  on which  
my father  proposed  to send me because  she herself  desired  me
7






to join the band which braved the distance  to Mount  
Langbodo.  I had a preference  for Langbodo  myself  but since  
my father  would  not be persuaded  otherwise,  there  was nothing  
myself  or my mother  could do. It was all on the account  of a 
certain  cousin  of mine who had gone to live abroad  and would  
not return  home. My father sent me to bundle  him back for 
indeed  he was a man of a stubborn  nature.  When the time 
approached  for me to leave home on the errand,  my father  
summoned  me to his room.  He bade me draw  close to him and 
I obeyed.  He stretched  his arms round  my neck and addressed  
me as follows:
‘My son, I wish you to understand  that there  is no man living  
who holds  his son in greater  affection  than I. The reason  for my 
decision  to disallow  you from  journeying  with your colleagues  is 
two-fold:  one is this case of your cousin  who has presently  lost 
his head in the foreign  country,  his affair oppresses  my mind  
enormously.  The other  is this fear that your eyes have not really  
gathered  enough  experience  to equip  you for such a project  as 
Langbodo.  This is because  the one who lives in the farm-hut  
cannot really possess experiences  extending  beyond his 
farm-hut.  The experiences  of the village  dweller  will be limited  
to his village.  The man who strives  to journey  round places  
must  encompass  a wealth  of experiences  within  himself.
‘Even  then my son, going  abroad  is a difficult  task. The man 
who embarks  on a journey  must be fully aware  of the fact that 
he has placed  on his own neck a heavy burden  for he who 
normally  stretches  himself  on a comfortable  bed may once  
outside  of his own territory,  discover  himself  converting  the 
solid earth to a bed. He who has previously  grown  the habit of 
feasting  on the liver of the cow may turn out to be one to drink  
his gari without  meat. The man who does not even begin to 
approach  one ’s younger  brother  in age may turn to be the one 
to drip curses  on a man ’s head.  This, Irinkerindo,  is the regular  
plight of those who voyage  to distant  lands. You must take 
these into account  and be fully prepared  to accept ridicule.s  
deserving  of acceptance  and brush aside all of those befitting  
8






refusal.
‘Do not forget  any of these words  which  I speak  to you this 
day my dear son. May God grant reunion  between  us, if the 
Ruler of the Skies does not refuse  our meeting  again, then I 
believe  I shall set my eyes on you once again,  but then, death  
does not name  a date for his visits  neither  does disease  the date 
of invasion.  The Creator  alone  is He who has the record  of our 
departures  in his keeping.  If you return  to learn of my death,  
stand firmly  on your feet as does a gallant  man and prepare  to 
shift into my place.
‘For the rest of your days upon earth, watch after your 
behaviour.  You are never  to enter into partnership  with greed  
which  breaks  the tenth  law of God. You will begin  to see this In 
clear light while  I crack  the anecdote  of the drunkard  who once  
resolved  to know  the town of Lagos  for the first time. When  he 
reached  the bridge  which  stretches  over  the I agoon,  he persisted  
in looking  here and there,  forgetting  to concentrate  on where  he 
was going ’, in the end, he stood still, peered  into the water  
and stepped  on the railings  of the bridge.  Dangling  from this 
self-afflicted  position,  he dropped  head-down  into the water  
beneath.  A fish caught  him in the depths  and feasted  on him. A 
large beast had its grip on the fish and devoured  it. Some  huge 
snake swallowed  the beast; a vicious  fish of the Atlantic  on 
holiday  in the lagoon  discovered  the snake  whose  flesh provided  
his meal. It eventually  returned  a much  fatter  fish to the sea but 
was itself awaited  by a most swarthy  fish which  leapt at it and 
swallowed  it whole. Afterwards,  fishermen  discovered  this 
bloated  fish in their  net. They  operated  its belly  and found  the fat 
fish which  had journeyed  to the lagoon.  The fish was also split 
wide and they discovered  the snake.  Next they discovered  the 
beast  which  swallowed  the fish that swallowed  the drunkard.  So 
did one operation  lead to another  until they found the dead  
drunkard  whose death was a resemblance  of the end of the 
gluttonous  man  who sought  after  the belongings  of his neighbour  
until he ran his eyes into a tree ’s branch.  Beware  of greed,  hold
9






an urgent  conversation  with your legs whenever  you encounter  
him. He is deadlier  than poison.
‘I will halt now and commit  you into the care of God. Your  
creator  will solve  whatever  problems  that cross  your route;  He 
will remove  peril from  your road.  God will deliver  you from the 
hands  of enemies.  And as you follow  your own path, you will 
not share the same road with one possessed  of the devil.  
Olodumare  will deliver  you from  the hands  of bedevilment;  you 
will not fall into the very hands  of conspiracy.  You will not walk  
on a day when  hunger  hits the highways.  Farewell,  farewell  my 
son, fare very  well. ’
My father brought  his address  to a close like this and I 
followed  him with my own reply,  in this manner:
‘Ah, my father! you have surely lodged  fears in me with 
these  words.  If pity were not indeed  a total stranger  to Death,  
he will not snatch  you away so soon. This is because  you have 
served  me conscientiously  all your life; you pawned  all your 
possessions  to ensure my well-being.  Nothing  exists in this 
world which you have not yet applied  in the course of 
procuring  my welfare.  Where  is the cold which  laid hold of me 
some  years past? Could  I have really  remained  on the earth to 
this hour without  you? Ah, the deadly  cold which  gripped  me 
and yet I sweated  profusely,  pains ministered  unto my body,  
heat issued  remorselessly  and I was a bundle  of sprains.  A time 
when my chest swelled  and my belly diminished  in size. My 
cheeks were as balloon.  The bones and ribs of my chest  
plunged  upwards,  portraying  my chest as a whole  landscape  of 
farm-ridges.  Thin skins waffered  at my skull and the veins of 
the body  were as a lump  of worms.  My whole  body  was covered  
on cakes of dirt, the hair on my head resembled  that of the 
mangy  dog. My legs were as broom-sticks.  I was trembling  like 
a second-hand  motor-car  which experienced  locomotion.  My 
breath  puffed  out like a bicycle ’s tyre-tube.  My body turned  
white as a pregnant  woman ’s body — melancholy  befell  
members  of our household  and they ran about  like fishes  of the 
rivers, drooping  their heads like palm-branches.  Low-spirits  
10






found  their  path into my mother ’s heart  and our house  assumed  
the quietude  of night.
‘It was you, my father, who started  researches  into this 
matter. The nature of my illness was beyond your 
understanding.  You could  not tell with certainty  whether  it was 
epilepsy,  fever, chestwqrms,  dysentry  or rheumatism,  or 
backache  — you were engulfed  in this bafflement  until God 
sent forward  a truthful  herbalist  who came to our aid and I 
resumed  my playing  about.
‘What  good have I done  yet to repay  you? Father,  I tremble  
to hear you speak  of death.  Permit  me to work  and raise money  
to buy you an agbada,  let me toil to purchase  for you a fitting  
dandogo.  Allow  me some chance  to perform  feats worthy  of a 
son who loves his father.  These  are the only words  I can speak  
to you for now. I must head in the direction  where  you sent me. 
I shall enter  my room presently  and prepare  for the errand ’.
These  said, I headed  for my mother ’s place.  In the following  
morning,  I gathered  up my belongings  and went my way along  
the road leading  to the far country.  Three  days elapsed  after  
my leaving  home yet thoughts  about my father continued  to 
weigh  on my mind.  But soon enough  I began  to cast my mind  off 
home,  turning  it instead  on the voyage  ahead  of me. 1 cannot  
recount  all the things  which  my eyes witnessed  before  I arrived  
gt my destination,  for a strange  journey  it proved  to be, such 
that I had never before  experienced.  The route was the very 
abode  of murderers  and cut-throats  and we often espied  them  
patrolling  the highways,  all 'eager to shed some fresh human  
blood.  The point  to my advantage  however  was, I did not travel  
alone, I was in the company  of other voyagers  and yet three  
times did we run into these robbers  before  we arrived  at our 
destination.  The rogues  slaughtered  about twelve among  us 
during  one of our encounters  with them. I am indeed  thankful  
to my Maker  that despite  all the hazard.s  of this journey  which  
took three months,  I was able to reach  the abode  of my cousin  
in one piece.
11






It will surely  amaze  you to hear that before  my arrival  in the 
country,  the one whom  I sought  had already  conversed  with his 
heels and sped away. He had learned  of my mission  somehow  
and had gone under the wraps in a farm. All my efforts  to 
detect  his hiding-place  proved  to be abortive.  It took a while 
before  his presence  on the farm came to my knowledge,  so I 
deployed  guides  who took me to the place. God extended  His 
infinite  mercies  unto me on this day so much that, before  he 
became  aware  of it, I had him in my grip. And when  he turned  
and looked  into my face he began  to tremble  from head to feet, 
it was his love which  he had for me that cowed  him thus and he 
prostrated  himself  before  me in total penitence.  We exchanged  
greetings  and I chanted  his orik;.  Thereupon  he took me to his > 
residence  in the town and treated  me to various  delicacies.
It was night-time  before  I could broach  the subject  of my 
mission  and I reproached  him a lot over his past misconducts.  I 
will not give in to needless  details,  we proceeded  home  after I 
had dwelled  in the country  myself  for a full month.
I arrived  back home  on the seventh  year of my departure.  It 
was the third day after my father ’s death  and they had just laid 
him to rest.
My dear friend,  it lacked  only a little for my father ’s death  to 
drive me into madness.  For the first three weeks  after I had 
grasped  the fact, I could  not tell whether  I was still on this earth  
or heaven;  I was practically  dead  to the world.  In the dawn  of a 
certain day, I woke up early and headed  to my father ’s 
graveside  and there wept bitterly.  I began to compose  an 
appropriate  dirge  which  I rendered  at the top of my voice  thus:
‘This is what remains  of my life! Father,  I left you in the state  
of the living  and returned  to find you in the midst  of the dead!  
My father  whom  I left behind  has taken  residence  in the grave!  
Death  has snatched  the strong  man and taken  him home.  Death  
has smitten  a man of importance!  My sympathizer  is no more!  In 
whom  did I repose  faith  besides  you my father!  Who  will provide  
my meals  from  hence!  To whom  shall I report  my troubles!  With  
12






whom  shall I hold mid-night  converses!  Ah, Death,  you oppres ­
sor of the human-  kind,  what  wrong  have 1 committed  to deserve  
this? Depart,  Death,  and hence  be detached  from  me! You lone 
enemy  of the thousands  of creatures  whom  God sent into the 
world.  Death,  you bring  end to them  all, the plants  of the forest;  
you announce  end to the snakes,  the birds  of the sky receive  their  
own ends from your hands,  even so do you affect  the animals  
which  walk  on all fours.  What  creature  of a hardened  nature  are 
you! You have  no pity for men,  you never  blink  or experience  the 
smallest  remorse  when  you decide  our fate. Let the man  weep  till 
he bursts  his eyeballs,  you have no concern  for that at all. Our 
sleeping  in ashes  for long periods  is not sufficient  to make  you 
repent.  Our writhling  in ashes  for endless  seasons  will not win 
your  sympathy.  You have  no taste  for sacrifice  and give no regard  
to sigidi,  neither  do you accord  the magical  charmbelt  the smal ­
lest respect.  Ah! Do you never  pause  once  to consider  the nature  
of your own end also? Or have  you really  forgotten  that end lies 
in wait for you too! You must  get ready  and prepare  yourself  for 
judgement  when life comes  to a close. For all creatures  of the 
earth  will join hands  to deliver  you to judgement.  The flies even 
must give evidence  against  you, not leaving  out the ants — they 
will all contribute  some  spite  to your  damnation.  The handiwork  
of God all are being  ruined  by you. You have shortened  the lives 
of the fishes,  earthworms,  insects,  toads,  snails,  tortoises  and the 
grass-cutter.  The bats and the owls,  the rats and boas,  not leaving  
out the elephants,  all of these  have  known  some  pain  through  your 
whip. They must all bear testimonies  against  you. Death,  you 
cruel  creature,  I render  you to the judgement  of God ’.
So saying,  I left my father ’s grave and found  my way liome.  
The funeral  was well performed  and quite elaborate  as well. I 
did not get to see my father ’s body before  he was laid to rest 
but my younger  ones who witnessed  it all recounted  to me how 
relatives  from far and near had brought  clothes,  shrouds  and 
coffin  that accompanied  him to his grave.  They  also slew a lot 
of rams. I myself  was witness  to several  baskets  of eko on my
13






return and how drummers  entertained  the inmates  of our 
house.  I spent a lot of money  during  the ceremonies  but even 
these spendings  hardly  sufficed  to erase thoughts  of my father  
from my mind.  When  1 smiled,  it was scarcely  a genuine  one for 
sorrow  filled the depths  of my heart. My father had himself  
willed  out most of his belongings  among  his children  before  his 
death  so no arguments  erupted  from that direction.  My mother  
would  have been given in marriage  to one of my father  s close  
relatives  as is customary  but she preferred  to stay back to look 
after the children,  f had never before taken to any great  
account the nature of troubles which elders normally  
combatted  until after this event of my father ’s death. Iron 
proves  to be of a little weight  compared  with the nature  of 
burden  the eldest son bears. Those things which formerly  I 
never  set my hands  to, became  my lot. And matters  which  were  
no concern  of mine previously  became  my pre- occupation  — I 
assumed  the position  of a settler  of quarrels  amongst  members  
of the household.
Since that day when I experienced  this great loss, I never  
ceased  to dream  about my father.  And in the reality  of those  
dreams,  it always looked  as though  he was still alive. What  
became  a source  of wonder  to me W95 that whenever  I met him 
in the dream,  I never thought  of him anymore  as a dead  
person.  Usually  after dreaming  of him like this, I would  wake  
up in the middle  of the night  and weep  bitterly.
I recall now a time when I met him properly  decked  in a 
beautiful  agbada,  his body  gleaming  like that of a child;  he was 
very handsome  indeed.  He held out a mirror  in his hands  and 
bade me to peep into it. Obeying,  it was a beautiful  stretch  of 
road which  confronted  me, broad  and lined at the edges  with 
brass.  At the end of this road was a most magnificient  building  
which  wore the appearance  of a king ’s palace.  Even so, before  
any man would reach this beautiful  place, he must brave  
through  a most evil midway,  which as it seemed  was watched  
over by some apparently  famished  wild animals  of numerous  
temperaments.  After I had feasted  on the contents  of the 
14






mirror  to my satisfaction,  my father  asked  me to relate  to him 
the things  that I had seen and I told them all to him. He took 
my narration  with keen attentiveness  and said to me, ‘your life 
is this you have beheld  in the mirror.  You will initially  witness  
troubles  but joy will be your lot in the end. You are not to lose 
courage  in the hour of suffering  lest you should  find it difficult  
to have your share of this happiness.  Even so did my father  
speak  to me in the dream  and I woke up from sleep.  A manr  of 
strength  indeed  was he who answered  to the name  Oyindayepo.
A certain  day was it after my father ’s death,  I was preparing  
myself  for an outing  when a king ’s messenger  came into my 
doorway.  After we had greeted  each other, he informed  me 
that tlie king desired  my presence  and that I should  appear  
before  him without  a moment ’s delay.  This earned  me a great  
deal of surprise  because  I had never  formed  the habit of going  
to the king ’s place, and neither  had I committed  a crime.  My 
father  on the other hand  was a regular  visitor  to the palace  in 
his lifetime,  for he and the king were very close friends,  even  
before  the latter ascended  to the throne.  I asked the king ’s 
messenger  to go on ahead  and that I shall not delay  in coming  
behind him. Thereupon  I changed  my dress, picked up a 
transparent  undervest  and placed  a newly  woven  outfit  of logo 
over it. That done, I topped  the pair with my father ’s own 
favourite  garment  of etu, not leaving  out the trousers  which  
also was of etu. Next, I stretched  a unique  dog’s ears ’ cap of 
sanyan  on my forehead,  permitting  the ears to flap sideways.  I 
had"  just purchased  a gold-ring  from the smith,  this I plunged  
into the forefinger  of my left hand. Overjoyed  by the 
spectacle  of my outfit, my mother rushed into her own 
apartment  and brought  out a shawl of aran which  she folded  
and placed  as a lace on my shoulder;  it was in fact a new 
material  which she had lately ordered  for herself. I then 
proceeded  to step into a pair of sandals  which  were from the 
snake ’s skin. I strapped  my new watch  round  my left wrist,  went  
forwards  to regale  my right arm with a bloody  walking  stick
15






which I had brought  with me from the distant country.  1 
deployed  a youth to keep me company  and then began to 
conduct  myself  along  the route  leading  to the king ’s palace.
As I braced  that distance,  joy filled my mind.  I was saluted  
gracefully  as though  I had increased  in size. Several  of those  
men who never accorded  the slightest  importance  to my 
existence  previously  overtook  me and prostrated  flat before  
me. They voiced  their salutations  in the words,  ‘Vive long, be 
long spared ’, and 1 cheered  them all with the befitting  
acknowledgements.  It was as if I had suddenly  transformed  into 
an elder. A number  of the maidens  of our house who sold 
things  at the side-streets  came up to me and knelt by my feet, 
they re-adjusted  their head-gears  and marked  ray passage  with 
the fullest  obeisance;  they did me much  honour.
A surprise  awaited  me when  I appeared  before  the king. He 
had hardly  set his eyes on pie before  he dashed  into his room  and 
locked  the door behind  him. When  he returned  later,  his chiefs  
explained  to me that I resembled  my father  in my attire to an 
extent  that his head swelled  for grief, so much  that he had to 
enter his ante-room  to weep out his sorrow.  As a king, he was 
forbidden  to cry in the presence  of his subjects.
On his return  the king retook  his place on the throne,  and 
observing  that I was some distance  away from him, he called  
out thus to me, ‘Come  directly  to me, Irinkerindo  my son, come  
on closer ’, and I obeyed  and went closer  to the throne.  Seeing  
that I was well secured  by his side, the king turned  to face me 
and began  to address  me in the manner  that follows:
‘Irinkerindo,  it was I indeed  that sent for you. I have to 
commend  you for the funeral  which  you gave to your father,  
the king of Heaven  will grant that his departure  become  in 
itself  the floodgate  of goodness  for the entire  household.  Your  
father ’s death  brought  me a lot of amazement,  for he himse'f  
had come  up to me here in my palace  shortly  before  his death  
and he was in good health  at the time. He stayed  with me for 
such a length of time and we chatted  with each other on 
16






diverse  subjects.  It was only five days after this when news  
reached  me that he had passed  on the ghost;  I suffered  a great  
deal of pain from the news. And the nature  of Oyindayepo  is 
such that his passing  away cannot  but arouse  grief in one’s 
heart.  He accorded  me my due respects  and never  ceased  from  
calling  regularly  at my palace.  It is the memory  of these things  
which  prompted  me to invite you his son, today,  to exhort  you 
to strive even harder  in maintaining  the good name which  he 
left behind.  During  his last visit here, he touched  over much  of 
your impressive  conducts  towards  him and that your affection  
for him was immeasurable.  He did not forget  to relate  a bit of 
his own love for you to me also, even elaborated  on how he had 
taught  every  jot of his magical  knowledge  to you. In short that 
none of his wealth  of knowledge  and wisdom  is hidden  from  
you. I gathered  also on that occasion  how you had been  
unhappy  about  your inability  to join up with Akara-Ogun  and 
the others  whom  we despatched  recently  to Mount  Langbodo  
because  of the errand  which  he insisted  you should  run for him. 
Your voyage  to the distant  land, he confided  to me, would 
make you a man of greater experiences  and discerning,  
qualities  which would make you to perform  in the future as 
your other  comrades.
Even now, Irinkerindo,  another  matter  has reared  its head,  
and if your father  had not died he would  be the person  to run 
the errand  for me. Oyindayepo,  it is obvious  taall,  was a man of 
solid courage.  And since  you are stepping  into his shoes,  I am 
very curious  to see how you will fit out in those  shoes.
‘The errand  is this: I have this desire  to assign  you to lead a 
special  delegation  of hunters  on a voyage  to a certain  place  
named  the Mount  of Ironu,  which  has its location  in the Forest  
of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.  There  is a certain  
tree in that country  whose  name is Thought,  Ironu. It is the 
fruit of this same  tree of thought  which  interests  me and which  I 
desire  you to pluck  for me. This  tree of thought  is it that gives  the 
country  its fame,  for a mysterious  tree indeed  is the tree of Ironu.
17






My father has told me a lot about this tree in his time, that if this 
tree is planted  close to the source  of any town’s river, whoever  it 
is that drinks of it would be instantly  transformed  to a wise man. 
And yet what is it that forms the root of the universe in the 
absence  of this Ironu of which we speak? It is the lack of thought 
which  leads a man into stealing  and lures him to speak  vile of his 
neighbour.  This same lacking  in sufficient  thought  misleads  men 
into cheating  their neighbours;  it is the thought  which ignites a 
motor-car ’s engine, forms the base of the railways  and provides 
the wings by which men frolick about in the skies. Ironu it is that 
makes victor of a warrior and forms the foundation  of healing. 
To crown it all, if you catch a man in the process  of saying that 
God is of a little potency,  such a man is clearly  suffering  from the 
lack of thought. Myriad powers give company  to Ironu and it 
marks the difference between men and beasts. Therefore,  
Irinkerindo,  son of Oyindayepo,  go now and fetch me this fruit 
which carries  the name of Thought .
Those were the words of the king and when I perceived  that 
he had finished,  I rose from my seat and I began to reply him 
in the following  manner:
‘Kabiyesi, live long, be aged in honour. May the sandal 
endure  long on your feet. I have taken in every word which you 
spoke. It is the head which rules the body, the king is he who 
runs a town. You are our head, even as the hands and legs 
cannot renounce  the body, so also it is that I cannot play the 
lout before you. Kabiyesi,  I wish you.to understand  it today that 
it is not only he who takes one’s mother to wedding  alone that 
stands as one’s father. A man may possess a single father and 
one mother,  a man may equally  be endowed  with two mothers 
and two fathers, he can even have more than twos in his 
keeping — haven’t we beheld some men with their fathers and 
mothers  alive and yet they pass for fatherless  children?  Let him 
come from East or West, whoever  it is that extends a hand of 
liking to a man is his father. Kabiyesi,  while I understand  the fact 
that my father is no longer on the surface of the earth this day, 
18






may the king live long, I know perfectly  well that you are worth  a 
father to me,
'And now with regard to this errand — I must go. For who 
am I to say no to such request?  A twig clearly  will not strain its 
neck in the presence  of the wind. I wish all the citizens of this 
town Io understand  it from this hour that Oyindayepo ’s death 
will not mean the end of feat’s from his household;  his 
departure  will not brit^g the glowing  moonlight  of his house into 
darkness.  Even if it is the truth that Oyindayepo  has shifted 
seat, he has implanted  a new stalk in his old shoes  who must take 
his place, the sandals  which my father  left behind  I have strapped 
to my feet, the road on which he trod I am fully primed  to tread, 
I have woven a thick pad with which to support his weighty 
responsibilities  on my head. Ah! How pitiful  it is that the bird has 
flown! Oyindayepo  who performed  marvels  for me is no more! 
He strained  himself  for me, ah, how  he strained  for me!
‘Even so Kabiyesi  I will now ask a certain help of you. 1 want 
you to elect an appropriate  personality  in addition  to myself, 
that we may both tour the entire environs and make  
announcements  concerning  this taA of the Forest of One 
Thousand and Four Hundred Deities; and we must be 
despatched  on the tour immediately  even as many of our 
seasoned hunters are already bound for Langbodo with 
Akara-Ogun.  After this, the next task would be to send some 
strongmen  to powerful kings reigning over kingdoms  in the 
distant countries, that they also may send out their own 
emissaries  for our company.  I will be overjoyed  indeed once 
this is carried  out for much of our stout-hearted  hunters  whose 
prowess are yet unapparent  to the World should thus be 
revealed,  and once they are all gathered  like this, the next thing 
would be to name a date and the going shall follow. Father of 
all, live honoured. ’
These were my words to the king and he rejoiced  greatly  on 
hearing them. When I had paused, he peered straight into my 
face and blew his cheeks with laughter,  replying  like this, ‘We
19






only deceive  ourselves  thinking  Oyindayepo  has departed  from  
us, this one will perform  greater  wonders. ’
Those done, the king ordered  that 'food be spread  before  
me. He also ordered  wines  which  he poured  out for me himself.  
Without prolonging  matters unnecessarily,  we refreshed  
ourselves  on two full bottles  before  I sauntered  out of his palace.  
Before  my departure,  the wines  had already  begun  to take their  
toll so, I stretched  out my dog’s-ears ’ cap sideways  and staggered  
out.
I had scarcely  appeared  on the street  before  a drummer  took 
his place  before  me, and I bade him beat his drums  for me. He 
revelled  Oii his drum and I also strained  at my waist, over­
flushed  with pleasure.  Friends  and relations  who heard us 
rushed  out to partake  in the dancing.  When  I approached  our 
house ’ front,  I observed  that it had been filled up with people.  I 
squandered  a lot of money on this day; it was a day for 
entertainment.
On the seventh  day, the king sent word to me to inform  me 
that he had ordered  a man to be arranged  who would  keep me 
company  to the neighbouring  homesteads  and towns.  He also 
suggested  that I name a date of my convenience.  I gave the 
seventh  day following.
When  the day arrived,  myself  and the king ’s men went round  
the cities and towns  heralding  the prospects  of our impending  
mission  and we were warmly  received  everywhere.  As we 
approached  town after town and village  after village,  food was 
placed  at our feet including  kegs of palm-wine  which  flowed  in 
such excess  that we almost  trampled  on them.  It was a journey  
which yielded  exceeding  profit. This was the time when we 
encountered  one strange creature whose name was 
Ibembe-Olokunrun,  or the Barn of Worms.  His home was in 
the hollow  of rocks, and we brought  him home  with us. I had 
taken it upon myself  to go out singly and seek him in his 
habitation,  for the inhabitants  of a town in his vicinity  had 
.dropped  us hint of his presence  in the rocky  landscape,  which  
20






accounted  for why I resolved  to go and meet  him even there  by 
myself.  A native  of the town also volunteered  to lead me some  
of the way; he trekked  a full two hours  with me after which  he 
pointed  in some devious  direction  leftwards  and retreated,  
leaving  me to battle shrubs  ahead with my head. The route  
leading  to the creature ’s house  took me across  a certain  thicket  
on the very outskirts  of the wilderness.  Before  he defected,  my 
guide  had warned  me to beware  of this being  who, according  to 
him, might  only be too eager  to accept  me as an extra piece  of 
meal. I added  this to an information  I gathered  earlier,  that it 
was Ibembe-Olokunrun  who ate the most of every living  being  
on earth.  No creature  dared  to match  him at drink,  for he was 
never  satisfied  before  he had drained  up the whole  expanse  of a 
deep  torrent.
A most unusual  individual  was Ibembe-Olokunrun,  this is 
his story - before  his departure  from the dome  of heaven,  he 
had robbed  the Heavenly  vestry  of the garment  of immortality,  
without  the approval  of God. The original  owner  of the cloak  
was a man who was famous for his name, Ogodogo,  or 
Glory-to-glory.  And no sooner  was this man done with his act 
of thieving  than he fled into the world.  But even on his reaching  
earth,  he did not severe  himself  from his former  ways one bit. 
Ibembe-Olokunrun ’s arrival on earth coincided  with the 
Beginning,  when  God had just sent man to the world  and there  
was no sin. The inmates  of heaven  spent their leisure  hours  
visiting  the earth.  On one particular  occasion,  Ibembe-Olokunnn  
summoned  both the pilgrims  from heaven  and natives  of the 
world to his residence  for supper. And when  
he realised  that the meat which  he arranged  for would  hardly  
suffice,  he slaughtered  his oldest  son in order to augment  the 
meat.  And on seeing  also that there  was to be a dearth  of wine,  
he slew his oldest  daughter  and pouicd  her blood  into a bottle.
On their arrival  however,  the guests  from heaven  conferred  
among thfemselves  and decided  to make him a present  of 
curses,  this because  they also called  to mind the nature  of his
21






misconducts  in heaven. Their spell was that, until his 
repentance  day, no matter how much he ate he should never 
know satisfaction.  And also, if even he drank a river dry his 
thirst should never be assuaged.  Even thus was the man altered 
to a most miraculous  creature.
When I encountered  him he was clad in an apron which 
served as cover for his groin. Two slain antelopes  lay in his 
front and he was making a snack of them. Before I had come 
near enough,  I invoked  the powers of ogede and bade it soften 
his heart towards  me. Then 1 saluted him as politely  as possible 
wdth these words — ‘how is it, Ibembe-Olokunrun  my friend? I 
greet you, well done. ’ But Ibembe for his part would not give 
me so much as a wink, he simply continued  to gnaw on the raw 
antelope  in his hand, totally occupied  with chewing. I waited 
until he had devoured  the first of the two meats then I spoke to 
him a second time, like this: *my respect, Ibembe-Olokunrun,  
well done. ’ He pretended  lo allow me to speak, chewed some 
more and gave me one long stare before replying,  through  the 
nose: ‘A aha’, and reached  for the second meat. This man took 
his time and picked the second antelope right to the bone 
before he finally grumbled  out aloud thus, ‘what is it that you 
want of me?’ So 1 replied,
‘It is you I have come to seek, it is on your account that I 
came hither. The king of my town requests  your assistance  for a 
certain project which wili involve voyaging  through a certain 
spot where numerous  fleshy beasts have their abode. In this 
home of animals you shall feast on fifty live antelopes  for 
breakfast  and sixty wild boars for lunch, a further five hundred  
foxes shall you grub for supper, and this is only the beginning.  
Henceforward  we shall proceed to the Forest of a Thousand  
and Four Hundred  Deities where grows a certain tree named 
Thought  and is laden with countless  over-ripe  fruits of Ironu. It 
goes beyond doubt that our tasting of this fruit of Ironu would 
provide  us the knowledge  of how to cure you of this sickness.  This  
is the brief  of my mission,  Ibembe-Olokunrun,  I apologise  for this 
interruption  of your wine and meat. ’
22






The man did not wait to hear me to the end before he rose 
on his feet and followed  me. It was the mere mention  of meat 
which roused him thus and he joined us right back to our town. 
But on arrival home, I was awaited  by the news of my mother ’s 
death. ’
This was how my visitor narrated  his. tale to me on this day 
till it became dark and we could not proceed  anymore.  I then 
suggested  that we leave the rest for the following  morning  when 
we would continue  with our story.
’ritm -ri do eUaeJ
fiSlf! twa =arij 'lyfofi.'i  .
srfi'swstbbe
ow.>hd'bbJBtK;
‘'-udJ-.  foa’isclKg  .jo* -jok
btafe' ‘(kIk.)’ ato&d'  sw«ilitiwv
lk>ayia>.«t«f4  ^jneiHdgbut  
. 'I'Wtfby&ia ’jW srii xswirt
moil siaij  bSig«jlq
. - I'i b3M0153'3Wtt'te:»b»jrb5ii!>d?\l  )'ri'r?;;t»ojl  JIUKiji  'wbl z' ’A'yw/ ’inliPbilisa  t.y4:ioS>  oii fi L-at; 
ii >l3fr-vh''
s ykni ,?! ar! i(41 <!(■ ;!■; -Hns-. ’d
^fcdt ’Siirani  u br/br;  j'f.z-i >>&:
.■ i„(5 fiii j ;..l b;i(^ iAiviiu;  
t bhi libmi'onei
'! jori; *s Jiial'G!.'!
23






JOURNEY  BEGINS  TO THE  MOUNT  
OF THOUGHT,  IN THE  FOREST  OF A
THOUSAND  AND  FOUR  HUNDRED  
DEITIES
No sooner  was I done wkh greeting  this visitor  of mine m 
his room  early in the morning  of the next day than word came  
to me that breakfast  was ready, so we all went to the table to 
have breakfast.  It became  a surprising  thing  for me to discover  
that, inspite  of the fact that I had failed  to herald  the presence  
of this man amongst  all my friends  in the town, many  of them  
had heard  of him somehow  and even before  we were able to 
tackle our breakfast,  many of the townspeople  had begun  to 
beset my house  in large numbers.
I went in search  of my writing  materials  and made myselt  
ready, the man also braced  himself  together  and began to 
address  the gathering  in this manner:
‘Citizens  of this town, nobles,  I greet all of you who are 
seated  before  me. Needless  to say that I am much pleased  to 
see you gathered  thus this morning.  Without  a doubt,  many of 
you I have not met before  today  and unless  I am wrong  in my 
judgement,  I am myself  a complete  stranger  to the bulk of you.  
It was the night  before  yesterday  that I arrived  here and we had 
plunged  into work right from the moment  of my arriving,  we 
worked  right through  the dusk yesterday  which  left me only a 
few leisure  hours  or I should  indeed  have strolled  round  town,  
and in so doing,  called  at many  of your homes.
‘This friend of mine here is someone  you .must all thank  
heartily  on my account,  for he is truly a good-natured  man. He 
has expended  a lot of his resources  on me since the time of my 
arrival  and he and his wife have both exerted  themselves  for me 
in no small  measure;  they have placed  comfort  within  my reach,  
making  me feel as though  I am still in my own house.  I want you 
all to rise now and express  some  thanks  to them.
24






When the man had said this, his audience  rose and 
addressed  their thanks  to me. Thereupon  he hade them retake  
their  seats  and he resumed  his speech  like this:
I recounted  yesterday  how the king of my city appointed  me 
to head a band of hunters  who were preparing  for an 
expedition  through the Forest of a Thousand  and Four  
Hundred  Deities to a notable  country  on the outskirts  of 
heaven,  the name of which is Mount Ironu. This was the 
country  where  we would  pluck  the fruit of the tree of Thought.  
I relayed  as well how myself  and a number  of the king ’s men 
had toured  cities and towns abroad  in search  of appropriate  
individuals  for this task. I have also narrated  how during  the 
course  of this campaign  we came upon one unique  individual  
whose  name  I gave as Ibembe-Olokunrun,  the man who ate the 
most  of all creatures  living.
Now it was not Ibembe-Olokunrun  alone who came back  
with us from  that tour. We also brought  home  one fellow  whose  
name is Kumodiran,  the Inherited  Clubs.  This was an entirely  
dignified  personality  in his own right,  even while  his own nature  
also aspired  to the most unusual.  On waking  up each morning  
this man awaited  a volunteer  who would  provide  him with six 
strokes  of the club on the back of his neck.  This for him was an 
early  morning  routine  and a failure  to fulfil this simply  reduced  
him to a dull and pathetically  fatigued  man for the rest of the 
day. First thing in the morning  he went out seeking  someone  
who would club him soundly  on the neck, six times, such a 
fellow  must also deal him six other  strokes  on his buttocks  and 
fist him hard on the chest six times. If you did not treat 
Kumodiran  in this manner,  he complained  of aches  in his head  
and neck for an entire  day and conducted  himself  all over the 
place  like an old man.
It was the nature of his parentage  which gave him that 
quality;  his life-story  goes like this:
In those days the beasts  of the forest had formed  a habit of 
transforming  themselves  into human  beings,  men and women.
25






and they came up regularly to the market to purchase 
foodstuffs.  Their original skins they would discard and go 
round the woods in search of ghommids  whose members 
resembled  tnose of men. When they took an arm from one 
ghommid,  they took the feet from another  and loaned the trunk 
from yet another.  They pieced all of these together  until they 
had assumed  the perfect  human  form.
Once upon a time, the elephant  came up in the likeness  of a 
man and the leopard  also came in the form of a woman.  These 
two people took a liking to each other at first sight and they 
agreed afterwards  to be joined in wedding.  The man hired a 
house  on a monthly  rent, and it was there that they met on market 
days which wa§ every nine days. There was such great 
understanding  between  this couple for a whole year, the one 
thinking  the other to be a real human  being. The long and short 
of this all was that the elephant  made the leopard  pregnant  and 
the child that was borne  him was the Inherited  Clubs. Kumodiran  
was a beautiful  man and extremely  powerful;  tall he was and 
stocky, I have never known or heard of anyone felling him in 
wrestling.  His arms were the lengthy  arms of his father but what 
he inherited from his mother was swiftness — Kumodiran  
resembled  his parents  to the core. Also, he was a great talent in 
hunting  for he stampeded  as many animals with his feet as he 
killed with his gun. This is all that there was to that individual.
The third noteworthy  man who came with us was a fellow 
called Ayederu-eda,  his own home-town  was only a short 
distance from ours. He was husband to one woman called 
Inudimeji  and she was from the house of Iberuparapo.
It was this same period when we entered the town that fire 
caught the entire house of Iberuparapo  and razed it to the 
ground; this singular mishap was not to deter Ayederu-eda  
from giving uS a befitting  welcome;  he took great care of us and 
indulged  us with various presents.  Hardly had this man heard 
of our arrival when he purchased  a whole box of bottled wine 
and two large cows and made presents  of them to us. He did 
26






not pause  there,  he sent us twelve  sack-loads  of yams and pure 
frothing  palm-wine,  made us trample on gari, sacks of 
yamflour,  eight giant gallons  of kernel  oil and outsized  
sachets  of salt. He owned  two mansions  in that place  and it was 
in one of them that he lived at the time of our knowing  him. 
The man whom  he entrusted  the delivery  of these  things  to was 
one Ojuayedun,  he was the head  of Ayederu-eda ’s servants.
The expenses  and kindness  shown us by this man was of 
such  enormity  that I resolved  at once  that he must  be my deputy  
during  the course  of this voyage  to the forest  of Elegbeje.
I wish to remind  you that we were not the only group  which  
our king despatched  abroad  for this purpose;  he sent other  
batches  of people  to farther  places  than  ours and on their  return,  
they brought  with them sturdy  men of all sorts  —hunters  who 
had excelled  in their trade even before  my mother  found  her 
road into my father ’s house;  men who were born on the roads  
of voyage  and have traversed  all the lands of the earth;  ageing  
men whose eyes have harboured  various  mysteries,  men of 
great know-how  whose heads had become  the repository  of 
all ingenius  thoughts,  men of great daringness  and warfare,  
herbalists  and merchants  of the nightly  sacrifice,  the sons of the 
poor and children  of the rich — all of these were gathered  
together  in our town in preparedness  — it was a moment  of 
great  significance.
When the king was satisfied  that we had assembled  an 
adequate  number  of men for the task, he suggested  that I name  
the date of our departure  and I gave him seventeen  days ’ time.  
Whereupon  the king placed an entire bag of thoney  at my 
disposal  for preparation  and bared the doors of his house  to 
me; I was turned  into one who strutted  in and out of the king ’s 
place  at will.
Children  of this earth lick only that hand which  drips the 
kernel  oil, they never  venture  close  to the fingers  of blood.  Or is 
poverty  not the same thing that bears — ‘wjiere  precisely  Sir 
did you say I have seen you before? ’ while wealth elicits
J






declarations  such as ‘we are relatives,  doubtless ’? Seeing  that 1 
had assumed  the very status  of esteem,  countless  of the people  
of the town began  to pour into my residence,  all anxious  to be 
on close terms with me; my old and far flung relations  were  
likewise  exhumed  by this matter  and I was crowded  by all sorts  
of cousins.  It was this same period  that I came to understand  
how my great grandfather  had been a relative  of some other  
fellow ’s great grandparents.  Also, I found that almost  
everything  I desired  came into my hands  at the least exertion-  
protective  medicines  and amulets,  charmbelts,  charm  rings of 
brass, aluminium  and steel; so did they reduce me to a 
connoisseur  of beads and charmed  waistbands,  my home  
became  the storehouse  for handwoven  leather thongs of 
elephants  and babboons,  neither  did I suffer a shortage  of 
tiger ’s hides-1  was an entirely  insulated  man.
For my own part, 1 had ensured  that my buttocks  was 
appropriately  padded  up with all sorts of magical  gadgets,  I 
soaked  barks  of trees  with spells  in the backyard,  purchased  the 
horns of the antelope  and stuffed them to the brim with 
charms-1  lathered  myself  with soaps  of charms,  drank  from  the 
pots of crushed  herbs, I branded  the tip of my tongue  with 
marks  of gbere,  marked  the hole of my anus, the interior  of my 
nostrils,  the soles of my feet, my navel,  my breast  and my palms;  
I courted  one thousand  four hundred  and three  gbere  marks  in 
the plain  of my skull.
Those  done,  I entered  into the forest  of rituals.  I indulged  in 
rituals  until I had sacrificed  six live horses,  I offered  six snails  in 
sacrifice  to my head, sacrificed  six fowls on the altar of sigidi  
and slaughtered  six rams in the backyard,  but sixty goats did 1 
provide in offering on the crossroads.  I improved  my 
knowledge  in Ifa, stored  up much  of the Ifa verses  in my head,  1 
acquired  fables of great antiquity  and memorised  every  
incantation  I could  lay my hands  on; 1 nearly  lost my life through  
excessive  consumption  of alligator  peppers.
I placed one room aside for storing  my amulets  and my 
incubi,  no child of ordinary  breeding  dared  to stray near that 
28






place  except  of course  such a person  had prepared  his amala  in 
this earth and desired  okra soup for it in heaven.  There  was a 
great abundance  of tira in the ceiling  of that house,  all fiery 
creatures  of divination  were locked inside, Osanyin  of the 
smoke-toned  voice dwelled  in the midst of sigidi, ato and 
charm-gourdlets  simply could not suffice to hold all my 
medicines;  all horrific  ingredients  of magic had touched  my 
hands during  the course  of preparation-  all of these things I 
had put together  before  the day of our going  reached.
When  the day of going  remained  only seven  days, our king 
sent his crier out to announce  that all citizens  of the town  
should  assemble  at the market  square  for a farewell  treat  in our 
honour  on the seventh  day.
On this day of our going,  marvels  occurred  in our town.  The 
entire market-place  had been crowded  up even before the 
arrival  of dawn.
Let me acquaint  you now with how we planned  to arrange  
our appearance  for that day; every member  of the expedition  
was to report  first in my residence,  from where  we would  all 
head straight  for the square  marching  in one single  file. All the 
hunters  of the town who were not taking  part in this voyage  had 
been instructed  to arrive early and take their place by the 
roadside,  lining  up from my house  to the marketplace.  Each  of 
them was to arrange  himself  by the road standing  to stiffish  
attention;  the man standing  next to the first would  be standing  
at a clear distance  of fifty feet from the first man. Each man 
standing  was to be faced by another  on the other side of the 
road, directly  opposite  him. The idea was for us to march  
through  them in that order  from my hodse  to the centre  of the 
town where  we would  meet the king and the rest of the town  
On reaching  each group  of hunters  standing  left and right,  they 
were to let off gunshots  into the sky in unison  to salute ‘us. Our 
own cue for beginning  the march  from  my house  was to be a loud 
shout  which  we expected  to hear from the market  square  on the 
king’s arrival.
29






The plan was executed  exactly  as we planned  it; we heard  
shouts,  so we commenced  our martial  steps towards  the town  
centre.
We who were bound  for the forest  of Elegbeje  were fifty in 
number,  and when  we all emerged  on the street,  ours was the 
appearance  of honour.  Several  of those men who had been  
hesitant  from the onset began  to show their eagerness  in that 
instant.  Guns thundered  as we walked  past and the barrels  of 
saluting  hunters ’ guns emitted  gusts of smoke.  We arrived  in 
the market on time and took our place which had been  
reserved  for us.
I will not be able to name every man in the company  in the 
order by which  they stood, rather  I shall touch briefly  on the 
first nine, and these  in any case are the stoutest  men of the lot.
I stood in the first position.
The man standing  next to me was Ayederu-eda  whose  story 
I have told you already.
The third man was one Inulayewa,  a man of exceeding  
wisdom  and fame.  He was not a native  of our town  really  but he 
happened  to be my in-law.  It was he who married  an older  
cousin  of mine from my father ’s side. That cousin  of mine had 
sojourned  for a length  of time abroad  and it was there  that they 
met and wed, therefore  Inulayewa  was no stranger  to the 
House  of Wandering  before  the matter  of One Thousand  and 
Four Hundred  Deities  arose.  Inulayewa  had travelled  wide and 
had acquired  the civilizations  of various  foreign  countries;  his 
eyes had witnessed  great bafflements,  he had dwelled  in towns  
and amongst  peoples  of the strangest  natures.  Inulayewa  had 
known hunger  and pestilence,  he had experienced  intrigue,  
sickness  was nothing  new to him. Likewise  had he sat himself  in 
chairs  of high esteem,  he had also known  such beratedness  as 
leads  a man to be seated  on a bare floor.  He has seen thirst,  has 
lived his entire day without  food and water,  he has traversed  
countless  dangerous  paths singly,  this man had suffered  from  
both cold and sunshine,  he has had his fair share of the 
30






thousands  of conspiracies  which  are the common  lot of people  
living  in lands  not their own.
The fourth  person  on the roll was a man called  Ewe-eye,  an 
experienced  herbalist  from the far West. There was no 
medicine  man more  versed  than this fellow  to tell you the truth,  
for he had lived in the crevices  of the iroko tree for six years,  
trading  his medicines  to the evil gnomes  of the woods.  And 
having  exhausted  those  years  in the cracks  of the tree, he stayed  
a further twelve calendar  months in the wilderness  taking  
instruction  from some devious  chimpanzee  who taught the 
secrecies  of the herb to him. Ewe-eye  had flogged  ghommids  
with his charm-belt  until they gave voice to urgent  cries, he had 
snatched  the garments-of  ghosts  who refused  to go to heaven  
on time, he understood  the language  of birds and beasts  and 
pertook  in the conversations  between  trees.  This same man had 
wed spirits on the banks of great rivers, has lent monies  to 
Osanyin,  he had robbed  Esu of sacrifices  on the crossroads.
The fifth was Olojumajele  or Poisonous-eyes;  on his part,  
this man fondled  a very curious  object,  an elephant ’s tusk, and 
he was most inseparable  from it for he always  ensured  that he 
took it with him everywhere  he went. His history  goes like this- 
his father  was a ghommid  but his mother  was a human  being.  
His mother,  an uncommonly  attractive  woman  in her teen-age  
decided  to go and pay her father a visit on his farm; she 
embarked  on this  journey  during  a season  of the Oro festival.  As 
she went along  on her way to the farm all alone,  a sudden  roar 
rose up from  the forest  in her front,  a roar which  was suggestive  
of the bull-roaring  of the Oro  masquerade.  She planned  to retreat  
at once but was awaited  by the same sound  from the rear. The 
impression  that  this created  was that the terrible  masquerade  was 
approaching  from  both  back  and front,  so that she soon  deviated  
from  the lane  and forsook  her path  to flee into  the forest.  But this 
sound  pursued  her even  into the thick  woods  and this young  lady 
fled and fled, since  it was great  taboo  for a woman  to come  face 
to face  with  the Oro  spirit.  When  the sound  eventually  died  down.
31






she found that she could no longer retrace her way to the road, 
even so did she get lost, wandering  and seeking her lost path 
futilely in the woods. The Oro sound which she heard was no 
ordinary  Oro however,  it was the evil spirits of the forest which 
simulated  that roar and cried like Oro. Nightfall caught this 
woman in the wood and it was in the course of her vain 
wanderings  that she encountered  a ghommid  whose  home was in 
the cragged  rocks.
He possessed  four eyes, two noses and two mouths. In the 
centre of his head were two large horns which resembled  the 
antlers of the buffalo. The ghommid  decided  that he would not 
harm this woman, instead he took her with him to his home in 
the crevices of rocks and made her his wife. Even so did the 
lady conceive for the ghommid and the product of that 
encounter  was Olojumajele.
The ways of the ghommid  can not always conform  with those 
of humans,  before long a quarrel  broke out between  this couple 
and the man sent his wife packing.  And since their child was 
such a tiny infant, he ordered  the woman  to take charge of him. 
Before their departure,  the ghommid  made his son a special 
offering of an elephant ’s tusk; a massive tusk this was, and 
burrowing  through it at the centre was a certain large hole. 
Wherever  a man wished to see on this earth, and regardless  of 
its distance,  he was only required  to peer through  that hole and 
the place would come into view at once.
The man standing in the sixth position was Kumodiran,  
with whom you arc already  familiar.
The next man, in the seventh place, was a sinew called 
Filasayepo  who possessed  a mystery  cap which he also carried 
all about. This cap was to Filasayepo  what Olojumajele ’s tusk 
was to him. He was Olojumajele ’s maternal  relation  in any case, 
but his own father was a most significant  ghommid;  his father 
was younger brother to the lord of the sea, Olokun, and 
younger brother yet to one Esidale who is a noteworthy  
chieftain  in heaven.  Filasayepo  himself  lived his boyhood  in hell 
32






for his father  had turned  him over to Satan  for proper  training  
since he was only a child. And Satan  showed  that child one or 
two things  in hell for he assigned  Filasayepo  to the flames  of 
hell making  him to stoke and fan their fires. This was tfie 
reason  why the man ’s eyes turned  to red kernels  and his body  
assumed  the blackness  of the cooking  pot.
The wondrous  thing about  the youth  was that, his character  
soon  waxed  too strong  for the devil.  When  the devil sent him on 
a devious  errand,  he ran the very opposite  of what errand  he 
has been sent to run. When Lucifer  asked him on an urgent  
mission  to the world to brew trouble  between  two friends,  he 
ensured  that he made their friendship  stronger.  On occasions  
when the devil quarreled  with his followers  in hell, he went  
between  them and made  sermons  to them.  Consequently,  Satan  
marked  him down as a retrograde  presence  and banished  him 
out of hell. Once out of hell, he encountered  a certain  servant  
of God and unburdened  the chronicle  of his adversities  to him. 
So impressed  was this messenger  of Heaven  by his deeds  that he 
made  him a present  of this special  cap; whatever  he wanted  or 
desired  to have done, he was only required  to address  it to the 
cap and consider  it done.  There  was a spirit  resident  in that cap 
who could be recalled  into the physical  world;  he carried  out 
assignments  for Filasayepo.
Even so Filasayepo  turned  himself  away from hell just the 
same and came into the earth. He diverted  himself  to hunting  
the moment  he arrived  and it was during  one of his hunting  
expeditions  that he met Kumodiran  who became  his friend.  It 
was Kumodiran  who brought  him into this event of the voyage  
to Mount  Ironu.
The eighth man was Ibembe-Olokunrun  whom I have 
already  introduced  to you.
The ninth was another  interesting  fellow  called  Sugarcane  
or Ireke; it was he who turned  dancing  into a noble craft and 
transformed  singing  into a significant  trade,  Ireke  owned  a flute 
which  he caressed  like a child.  He was a relative  of Olohun-iyo
33






who accompanied  Akara-Ogun  to Mount  Langbodo  that other  
time. This man danced  better  than the insect;  his flute brought  
such melodies  that whenever  he played  it, both man and beast  
danced  themselves  to near paralysis.
Now you have heard  the names  of the most important  nine 
amongst  us. 1 shall not give you the names  of the rest forty-one  
because  time is flying. Everyone  of us held a gun except  Mr. 
Sugarcane  who insisted  that his weapon  was his flute; he played  
us melodious  tunes  on the road of Elegbeje,  so that our voyage  
itself  might  brew  sweetness,  like the juice  of the sugarcane.
When those hunters  had all taken position,  they were a 
spectacle  for pride and envy. They  stood  in readiness  like men 
who reposed  their faith in God; these men were hardened  in 
their resolutions  like the spice of rock from the crag, their  
minds  had sprouted  wings, their minds  had taken flight from  
the home of regress,  finding  refuge  on the outskirt  of heaven.  
The sons of men who took one glance at them blew their  
cheeks  with smiles,  they picked  up a significant  lesson  here that 
it is not in the ways of the Lord to refuse men their hearts ’ 
desires,  except  of course  if such desires  would  be of an ultimaite  
harm  to them. He who moulded  this universe,  spacious  as it is, 
and places  man above all things,  has achieved  the zenith of 
goodness.
After  the king had introduced  us to the citizens  of the town  
and made  nice remarks  about  us, he inquired  whether  I would 
like to say a word or two on behalf of my friends and 1 
consented.  Listen  to how I addressed  them:
T greet everyone  present  here today, I greet natives  of this 
land, I greet strangers,  1 greet all and sundry.  I greet you on 
behalf of these friends of mine who are journeying  this 
minute  to the Mount  of Thought  in the Forest  of a Thousand  
and Four Hundred  Deities.  The elders  have already  put it in 
the way of a proverb:  no matter  how long it should  seem  to our 
eyes,  sooner  or later, a hundred  years  would  become  tomorrow.  
Even that extra morrow  has also passed  by, which  brings  us to 
34






this moment—we are thankful to our God in heaven. It is the 
confident  trader who reaps the profit, the double-minded  one 
merely goes courting one confusion after another - God 
forbid that our own share should be like that of the 
double-minded  man.
Fellow citizens of this town, we whom you see in your front 
this day are no fools. When a child stumbles  and falls, he turns 
his face ahead and examines bis front but when he falls, the 
knowlegeable  elder peers backward  to investigate  the cause of 
his downfall.  Let us take one quick glance at the history of this 
town - does our community not deserve much better 
advancement than it has todhy? Should our forebears 
wake up perchance from their graves this day, what do we 
expect will be their remark concerning  us? For we are still 
pounding  yams as they pounded yams six hundred years ago 
and our method of stirring oka which is at least one thousand 
and two hundred  years old have known no refinement.  Do we 
not tap our wine as it was tapped from the beginning  of time? 
The art of medicine which those of the older days had 
mastered has all slipped through our fingers; arrogance  has 
stirred our race to the rear. Youths’amongst us speak as they 
please to their elders, sons berate their fathers and daughters 
flaunt the garments  of jiride before their own mothers, saying 
what is the use of mothers anyway, mothers everywhere  are 
useless’. I tell you all today, friends, that all of these things are 
products  of a common  lack of sufficient  thought.
It is in the light of these, fellow citizens, that we whom you 
see standing  before you today resolved  to travel from this earth, 
through the Forest of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities, 
to the outskirt of heaven where the Mountain of Thought is 
located, our purpose being to pluck the fruit of a tree which 
grows on the crest of Mount Ironu, the fruit of which will do 
t^ nation a lot of good. We depart this day for the sake of 
thousands  of generations  coming behind, we depart this minute 
or the sake of you all. There is nothing more pleasing to
35






Olodumare  than for a man to plough  the route  of progress  for 
his neighbour;  nothing  is more pleasing  to Him than for a man 
to eat and yet ensure  that his neighbour  also has a bite, nothing  
pleases  Him more than for one man to drink  and yet pass the 
cup on to his neighbour  so that he also has a drink.  That man 
who seeks  the retrogress  of other  men has turned  himself  into a 
lion in the midst  of beasts,  a kite in the community  of birds,  the 
green crawly snake in the congregation  of snakes. These  
animals have earned evil names for themselves  in the 
wilderness,  all creatures  of the earth give an urgent  counsel  to 
their  legs whenever  they come  in contact  with them.
T wish every  man here today  to understand  that we who are 
heading  off on this mission  now are not particularly  ignorant  of 
what fate lies in wait for us: we know  very well that evil beasts  
are already  lurking  in the route  of our expedition,  we know  that 
poisonous  snakes  are waiting  anxiously,  we are conscious  of the 
fact that we leave to experience  thirst, we vacate  our own 
hearths to answer a pact with numerous  unspeakable  
sufferings.  But I ask this, what is the life of man? Is it not this 
same little plant that beats at intervals  inside  our chests!  And 
what is the purpose  for which  God endowed  us with those tiny 
noisy machines?  Did He give them to us for each man ’s use 
alone?  Of course  the answer  is no! Your life was provided  for 
my benefit  and mine for yours.  The creator  did not infuse  any 
division  into the midst of men, he made them all into one 
united  fold — with a man ’s fingers  clasped  together  he does 
strike  his chest to boast.
‘We vacate this town today with joy knowing  that our 
mission  is for the ultimate  betterment  of the man next to us. 
Countless  times have I heard those older say this to my 
hearing-  if the kind-hearted  man stubs his toes, he will not fall 
down  for ever and ever more.  The man  who swots  everyday  only 
that his neighbour  might progress  shall never himself  be 
relegated  to the ground;  the wicked  has no standing  before  the 
honest,  the secrets  of the pompous  are very soon loosened  to
36






I them to attend to an urgent  business  in the bush nearby.  1 
branched  into the bush on the right, once there, I knelt in 
private  before  my God and asked  his special  guidance  for this 
journey.  I dovetailed  my hands  to the heavens  saying,  ‘sigidi  has 
no powers  before  the Lord,  spirits  dare not toy with the blade  
of His sword,  a man ’s own know-how  cannot  save him unless  he 
reckons  with the person  of God. ’ I enjoined  my Maker  that 
insofar  as I am leader  over these hunters,  he should  make of 
me a good head. I entreated  Him to give me such wisdom  as 
would  make me to act towards  each man in the company  as I 
would  wish him to act towards  me. Even  so did I commit  mysell  
into  the hands  of God,  for of all things  on earth  which  a man  might  
repose  his faith in, none is like Olodumarc,  who Himself  is the 
Maker  of all things.
That concluded,  I returned  to my friends on the road,  
whereupon  we faced  up to the path ahead  of us and headed  for 
the Forest  of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.
The Mount  of Thought  is a distant  country.  Even after a 
man has passed  the Forest  of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  
Deities,  he was still required  to travel onwards  over a further  
lengthy  distance  before  he arrived  there.  It is closer  to the vault  
of heaven  than Mount  Langbodo  for the citizens  of Thought  
trade every nine days with the people  of heaven.  A certain  
river separates  the place from heaven  and as a matter  of fact, 
the people of the Mount of Thought  see at close quarters  
everything  happening  in the domes  of heaven.  If you followed  
the bank of that river northwards  for three hours,  you would  
encounter  a gate which  stands  as demarcation  between  heaven  
and earth.  Just nearby  is the home  of Death  and his own house  
■ is only a short distance  from that of Disease,  his wife. You will 
? find also in that vicinity  the house of one other unique  being  
whose  name  is Baba  Onirungbon-Yeuke,  Man  with  the Sweeping  
Beard.  His own abode  is tucked  inside  the sky-scrapper  rocks  of 
the border  between  earth  and heaven.
39






The people flocked  after us and saw us off some of the way.
38






them to attend to an urgent  business  in the bush nearby.  I 
branched  into the bush on the right, once there, I knelt in 
private  before  my God and asked  his special  guidance  for this 
journey.  I dovetailed  my hands  to the heavens  saying,  ‘sigidi  has 
no powers  before  the Lord, spirits  dare not toy with the blade  
of His sword,  a man ’s own know-how  cannot  save him unless  he 
reckons  with the person  of God. ’ I enjoined  my Maker  that 
insofar  as I am leader  over these hunters,  he should  make of 
me a good head. I entreated  Him to give me such wisdom  as 
would  make me to act towards  each man in the company  as I 
would  wish him to act towards  me. Even  so did I commit  myself  
into  the hands  of God,  for of all things  on earth  which  a man  might  
repose  his faith in, none is like Olodumarc,  who Himself  is the 
Maker  of all things.
That concluded,  I returned  to my friends on the road,  
whereupon  we faced  up to the path ahead  of us and headed  for 
the Forest  of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.
The Mount  of Thought  is a distant  country.  Even after a 
man has passed  the Forest  of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  
Deities,  he was still required  to travel onwards  over a further  
lengthy  distance  before  he arrived  there.  It is closer  to the vault 
of heaven  than Mount  Langbodo  for the citizens  of Thought  
trade every nine days with the people  of heaven.  A certain  
river separates  the place from heaven  and as a matter  of fact, 
the people  of the Mount  of Thought  see at close quarters  
everything  happening  in the domes  of heaven.  If you followed  
the bank of that river northwards  for three hours,  you would  
encounter  a gate which  stands  as demarcation  between  heaven  
and earth.  Just nearby  is the home  of Death  and his own house  
is only a short distance  from that of Disease,  his wife. You will 
find also in that vicinity  the house of one other unique  being  
whose  name  is Baba  Onirungbon-Yeuke,  Man  with  the Sweeping  
Beard.  His own abode  is tucked  inside  the sky-scrapper  rocks  of 
the border  between  earth  and heaven.






The Forest  of a Thousand  Daemons  and the Forest of a 
Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities  have a common  route.  
You were required  to traverse  the entire  breadth  of the latter  
and also to travel past the city of birds and beasts  before  you 
came across a branching  on the right. In other words, the 
voyager  would  not reach the crossroads  leading  to Langbodo  
before  he branched  off. You must pass the river of indigo  but 
twice  were  you expected  to cross  the river of blood.
This description  of mine should  suggest  to you how perilous  
this voyage  was. Even so, we came into no mishap  whatsoever  
until we entered  into the Forest of Irunmale.  We were no 
sooner  admitted  into this jungle  than all sorts of strange  sights  
began to come into contact  with us. I cannot  now recount  to 
you all the strange  things  which  we witnessed  in that evil forest  
for ghommid.s  in that place  were extremely  numerous,  and they 
ran into our path from time to time as we plunged  on. I shall 
not fail to relate  to you a particular  occurrence  which  happened  
one morning  al about  nine o’clock.  This was how it occurred:
Il so happened  that we heard  a mysterious  voice  raise  itself  up 
suddenly  from the forest,  a very loud voice,  and it began  to hawk  
some  curiou.s  wares  thus, ‘Dwellers  ol the forest,  pilgrims  of the 
road,  hasten  here and buy from me. My wares  are numerous  but 
the price is little. Epilepsy  costs  only ten pounds,  small-pox  two 
pounds,  leprosy  four pounds,  lunacy  six pounds,  head-ache  ten 
shillings,  pain.s of the feet six shillings,  boils twelve pence,  
stomach-ache  ten shillings,  elephantiasis  one pound,  cold three  
pence,  diarrhea  a pound  and hall, craw-craw  three  pence,  cough  
one pound,  lever  seven  shillings,  worms  are fifteen  shillings  each 
etc. etc.
These  were the things which we heard with our ears and 
even as this unearthly  trader  hawked  out, we also heard  some  
other strange  voice.s calling unto her and buying from her. 
Shortly  after this, the trader herself  appeared  before  us. She 
was a woman  of uncommon  beauty,  clad in a while wrapper  
and the hair of her head was woven  into braids:  she wa.s light in 
40






complexion  but her shoulders  were burdened  by two 
enormous  wings which swerved  backwards.  On her feet was a 
pair of brass sandals,  her articles  of trade were displayed  on a 
tray of gold. No sooner had we snatched  a sight of her than a 
horrific chill ran across our spines to the extent that we were 
immobilized,  hardly able to raise an arm or leg. Our lips were 
likewise  sealed and we could not utter a word. But this woman 
turned to face us and began to address us in the manner that 
follows:
‘Sons of men, I am one of the servants  who run errands for 
the Lord. These creatures  you just heard buying up my wares 
are those we call the restorers.  It is you humans who bring 
disease  over your own heads in the earth but — ah! there are no 
such beings whom my God loves above you lot. And after these 
restorers  have purchased  these diseases  from me they go out 
and infect trees with them. That done, they also go and obtain 
tiny pieces of mirrors from God and espy carrier insects with 
them, gather up these insects and take them to the presence  of 
the Lord. It is God who then teaches the fly how to afflict 
humanity with its acquired disease, giving the insect His 
mandate  that it be freed and allowed into the earth to bring 
sickness into the bodies of men. In the dead of night, when 
seasoned herbalists and doctors have fallen asleep, these 
restorers  would fly out again and infuse their heads with the 
ways and means of curing the same diseases. But pity, when 
those specialists  wake up and the secrets of those diseases 
become  apparent  to them, they would hardly realise that all of 
these things are the handiwork  of God. If indeed  man had not 
blunted  the edge of his own cutlass by cutting through  the soil 
with it, his state would have been better by far than it is today. 
God Himself  should have surpassed  him in greatness  by just a 
small speck. He loves them. ’
On ending this discourse,  she flew away. And it was only 
after she. had departed  that we were returned  to our senses. 
Her revelations  encouraged  us greatly and they became  a new 
source of strength  for us. We resolved  in our minds that insofar
41






as it was a fact that God loves man as she has just pointed  put, 
He was certain  not to let us down in the hour of need.
We encountered  several spirits after this but the frequency  
of our encounters  with them soon reduced them in our 
estimation,  so much that we completely  lost our fear of them. 
We trekked on for a short while after this before we met one 
sprite who became our good friend. Her name was Iranlowo,  
Help or Helpmeet.  She told us of how she had set Akara-Ogun  
free from a certain ensnarement  into which one Agbako had 
put him; she directed  us on how we would travel and avoid the 
city of birds where the Father of Ostriches  was king over them, 
she advised us not to venture close to that territory  because 
according  to her, Akara-Ogun  and his men had behaved  most 
inauspiciously  towards them in the place. She showed us 
through a certain branch-off route which we took and 
by-passed the city of birds where Ogongo the father of 
Ostriches  was king over them.
This friendly spirit went her own way and soon we were 
faced by three hard-faced ghommids. When the first 
encountered  us, he ignored us completely  without uttering a 
word. But even as he was passing by us he hissed with 
contempt.  The second when it was his turn surveyed  us from 
head to feet, he sighed and walked past. But the third levelled 
us to the ant; he spat and said, ‘headless  people  all of these’.
This particular  one who had just berated us was no taller 
than a keg of wine, he was like a mere stump on the ground. 
Spying through the cavern of his mouth, I found two teeth 
missing, which gave him the appearance  of a monkey- you 
could easily have imagined  that his creator purposely  installed 
a doorway  into his mouth. Taking note of the blatant rydeness 
of these three, I made to reply the midget who had just spited 
us, ‘you are headless in your skull, your chest is headless, 
outcast  spirit with teeth like that of a bush rat’.
These words merely inflamed him and he became terribly 
abusive: ‘Do I not know you for what you are you children  of 
human beings? Mis-speakers,  mis-thinkers,  mis-wanderers.  
42






mis-self-conductors,  mis-ealers,  rais-drinkers,  conspirators,  
gossip-peddlers,  unyielding  squabbhng  maggots,  sinners,  liars,  
nincompoops,  cut-throats,  rogues,  empty-minded,  thoughtless,  
weak and wobbling  pairs of limbs- can you not see that you 
have no voice to raise where  we are speaking?  Toward  what  
consequence  do you conduct  your lives?  Tell me, you who plot 
intrigues  daily amongst  yourselves!  To what end do you direct  
your  existence?  Envy,  that is all you do to one another;  you never  
give support  to those occupying  exalted  seats amongst  you, 
your only thought  is always  on how to find a way to pull them  to 
the ground.  Those  who are blessed  with some wealth,  rather  
than give them assistance  by suggesting  ways of multiplying  
those riches,  you would  find a way of purging  them to the last 
penny.  This is the truth  of your lives. The position  in which  God 
placed  you you do not value, the immaculate  raiment  which  
God drapes  you in you have soiled  with kernel  oil. God gives  
the children  of human  beings  access  to rich wardropes  and yet 
they prefer  to wander  about naked.  Ingrates!  Can you not see 
how you burst rocks which  are a hundred  times mightier  than 
you? And what about  trees which  are taller  than sky-scrappers,  
do you not cut them down?  Large as the oceans  are they are 
accessible  to your whims.  You have with rare wisdoms  tamed  
elephants,  you cage tigers  as you please,  even so do you treat  
the lion, king of beasts.  We who have known  what ass-headed  
fellows  you are care very little about you; it is your crooked  
ways which  berate  you so in our eyes ’.
This was how the ghommid  rapped  our heads  with abuses.  
My eyes had been affixed  to the spot of the missing  teeth  in his 
mouth from the onset hoping to divert attention  in that 
direction  at the end of his speech  and scoff him off on that 
score.  But my thought  had changed  somewhat  even before  he 
had reached  midway;  all my thinking  that we ought  to engage  
them in a little fight to teach them a lesson had also 
evaporated.  For of all the allegations  he piled up against  
mankind,  I could not find any falsehood  in the least of them.  
Therefore,  when in the end be decided  to pause,  I dropped  my
43






head in melancholy,  and all my friends  with me; we simply  
retracted  back to our road and trudged  on, weakened  in our 
strides.
But the small matter of these ghommids  was to bring  
about a misunderstanding  in our own midst.  This was how it 
happened  —
We had no sooner parted with those ghommids  than a 
certain  gentleman  within our ranks called Gongosutakiti  and 
his brother  Inakigori-ite  began to grumble  aloud, actually  on 
the verge of calling me names because,  according  to their  
reasoning,  we had failed  to give those  ghommids  the treatment  
which  they deserved.  This angered  me a lot because  at that very 
moment  when we encountered  the sprites,  none of these men 
could utter a word,  they were all overtaken  by fright and were  
silent.  So this was all I deserved,  I who even managed  to dare 
them  and stare back at them?  Deeply  offended  by their manner  
of conduct,  I turned  to Gongosutakiti  and quizzed  him in this 
manner, ‘You Gongosutakiti,  where were you when we 
encountered  those men? Where  did you hang your tongue?  
Just answer  directly,  could you utter a word then? ’. Hearing  
this, I thought  he would  turn on me and attempt  to fight with 
me but he did not. Instead,  he rolled  up his shorts,  and together  
with his brother  Inakigori-ite,  boasted  that they were going  
after the spirits. We were not to know however  that the 
ghommids  had really  not gone far, and hardly  had they arrived  
on the spot where  those spirits  awaited  them  when  we began  to 
hear Gongosutakiti ’s cries of anguish:  ‘Rescue  me! Hasten  here 
all of you and rescue  me! Don ’t just stand  there and watch  him 
slaughter  me! Aah! He has plucked  out my eyes! ’ Leaving  us no 
option  than to take pity on him and save his life. Even so those  
spirits had plucked  off the eyes of Gongsutakiti  before we 
could get to them, Inakigori-ite  they tied hands back and 
abandoned  by the wayside.  He simply  sat cowed  in his bondage  
watching  like some trapped  viper. We pleaded  for a long time 
before their captors  finally took pity on them and released  
them to us. But Gongosutakiti  had become  a hindrance  for our 
44






expedition;  he had become  a blind man, we had to support  him 
hence by the arm through thickets and numerous  networks  ot 
creepers  which covered  the route of our voyage.
The end of Gongosutakiti  was near at hand in any case, and 
a very piteous end it turned out to be. For since that moment 
when his eyes were gorged out by those spirits was he resigned 
from this world and his thoughts ceased to be of this earth. 
Before long he began to refuse food and later on water. In the 
end he slumped,  we held him up and fanned his face but he 
would not be revived; his eyes were shut and we applied 
peppers  to them but that did not yield any result. We uttered 
spells but spells failed to make him reply to us, his mind had 
flown, cold began to run through  his veins, death had arrived.
Even so did we lose a significant  member  of our comply.  
We dug a hole and laid him to eternal rest. We mourned  him. 
we moaned him, we pitied him as much as we could. 
Inakigori-ite  strapped  a black strip of cloth to his dress as a 
sign of mourning  for his late comrade  who was also his younger 
brother.
WE ENCOUNTERED  ELEGBARA
We continued  on the road heading  towards  the Forest of a 
Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities and for some time no 
strange being crossed our path. It was a full three days 
shuffling  before we came at another  predicament  - three days 
after we had buried the body of Gongosutakiti.  It occurred 
thus:We came into a certain plain shortly after twilight and 
paused for rest and breakfast.  But we were hardly done with 
breakfast  when a multitude of children ’s voices broke forth 
from the direction  of the path ahead of us. This noise caused 
my heart to beat with fright for I had begun to fear that it might 
be the person of a uniquely  evil ghommid  whose notoriety  had 
resounded  in the whole earth laying in wait for us. A most cruel 
troll was this spirit I speak of and he rarely journeyed  alone, 
except in the company  of a etinue of children  who wailed in
45






his front and warned  the forests of his approach.  These  
happened  to be no ordinary  children  either,  they were known  
to the whole  world  as the Children  of Elegbara.  My father  had 
recounted  tales of Elegbara  to me, he was the twin brother  of 
Satan  and the sons of earth gave sacrifices  to both of them on 
the crossroads.
I was indeed  smitten  by terror when I heard the noise  
coming  from the heart of the jungle.  But rather  than allay my 
fears,  the events  which  followed  simply  made  disorientation  the 
lot of all of us. The content  of the noise came in this manner:  
‘You must not behold  him! You must not behold  him! Take  
cover  to once! Seek a safe hiding  at once!  Watch  your steps  sir, 
beware  of pot-holes,  do not dash your foot against  a stone.  
E-e-e-e-e-eh!  ee-e-e-e-  eeh! eh! Elegbara  tramples  earth!  He is 
club on the back of the lunatic!  Supple  lashes  at the shoulders  
of the unheeding!  eh! Elegbara  tramples  the road! You must  
not behold  him! The disobedient  will die! The one who beholds  
him beholds  melancholy  at daylight!  Turn aside  from him, turn 
aside  from  him, for who encounters  him encounters  peril! etc.
This was how the warning  came  to us and it drew  closer  and 
closer.  Quickly,  we began  to assemble  our belongings,  but even 
as we set about  doing  this, the entourage  appeared  before  us.
I will not lie in this matter,  fear gripped  everyone  of us at the 
sight of them and we scattered  rapidly  into the woods  helter  
skelter.  Some tucked  themselves  in holes,  some climbed  trees,  
others  scrambled  for the base of pits. No child  will behold  fear 
and not shudder,  Elegbara  was no child ’s toy.
As for me, 1 tugged  at a mound  of earth  and rose to the head  
of a rock in the vicinity.  It was from the spot that I peered  
downwards  on the roadway.  The trees and shrubs  on the rock 
covered  me entirely  and 1 stretched  out on the ground  behind  
them enjoying  a good view of the children  of Elegbara  down  
below  as they trod the forests.  They  were fifty in number  but 
none was taller than three feet. Their faces were besmeared  
with chalk  and camwood  and feathers  grew  upwards  from their  
heads;  they were a shimmering  black complexion.  Also, these  
46






beings were neither draped in shirts nor trousers, they were 
decked by yeri and cowries shells. Beads were lined on their 
knees and ankles, bracelets of brass circled their arms and 
brass tablets dangled from them producing sounds more 
resembling  the rattling  of idol gongs.
I waited patiently  for Elegbara  himself  but there was no sign 
of him. I waited a while longer and without him surfacing,  so I 
began to conclude that he was probably not coming with the 
lot. Even as I planned  to whistle a call to my colleagues  to come 
out of their hiding, earth began to tremble and animals took to 
their heels, birds deserted  their nests and flew out into the sky, 
snakes ran to tree-tops and squirrels gave tremendous  cries. 
Observing  all of these, I held on to my peace, lest I fell into the 
hands of Elegbara.
Shortly after this, the man himself emerged in the distance, 
accompanied  by his terrifying appearance.  A spacious sack 
hung from his shoulders and he strapped an assortment  of 
clubs all over himself.  He was extremely  dark; he nursed a thick 
shaggy hair on his head. His body was covered by filth and a 
huge horn-like object curved out to his buttocks from the 
centre of his head. He was himself a multitude of 
charm-gourdlets  and was also burdened  by broken calabashes; 
his teeth were more rancid than a lion’s. Even so did Elegbara 
set about hunting us everywhere,  combing and rummaging 
through  the whole leafy environs,  for he had smelt us.
All of a sudden a member of our delegation,  Ayederu-eda,  
leapt up from his hiding and sought another as Elegbara  tossed 
a club in his direction, his own thinking being that Elegbara 
had espied him but little realising  he had not been spotted but 
was only just exposing  himself  to his hunter. Even as he rose up 
Elegbara stretched out an arm and seized him. And as 
El^bara  prepared  to snap teeth through  his flesh, he cried out 
in this manner: ‘I am not alone, I am not alone, handle me 
gently and I will show you the’ hiding of my mates, we are 
numerous ’.
On hearing this, the ghommid  desisted  from killing him but
47






demanded  to know the hiding of his colleagues.  Even so did 
Ayederu  point in my direction  where I lay behind the leaves. 
When the ghommid caught sight of me he cried for joy, 
dropped  Ayederu  in his sack and sped for me. Seeing  what was 
coming to me, I lowered into a thick bush at the base of the 
rock, opposite  the path which he chose for climbing  up the hill. 
There I stayed in silence while the man charged  vainly for t e 
rock above. When he reached  the rock top and could not trace 
me, he suspected  the dark bushland  immediately  and tested the 
region with a sound club which hit the back of my head, but I 
dared not move. He cast a second club and it fell in my front, 
vet I did not utter a word. But the third hit my nose. This was 
most unbearable  yet 1 merely rubbed  my nose with my fingers, 
still maintaining  a dead quiet. Even so, he assured  himself  that 
I should  be nowhere  else outside  the unique thicket for he had 
seen no sign of my leaving  the area. He tossed a gourdlet  which 
lit the bushes and the whole place was overtaken  by a roaring 
fire. And as I perceived  how the fire was closing in on me I 
crept out and the spirit rose in full flight after me. He sped like 
wave and I raced like the antelope;  he sought food but I fled 
from death. During the racing, his sack dropped off and 
Ayederu  jumped out of it. On seeing this, he withdrew  from 
chasing me and sought to recapture  Ayederu.  I had no cause 
for waiting on my own part, I seized this opportunity  to 
widen the gap between  us. Some time went by before his mind 
returned  to his fallen sack so he abandoned  us both to seek it.
I had been running for sometime and when I could no 
longer detect any sign of him, I chose a certain tree an 
climbed  it to the top. But shortly  afterwards  he emerged  hissing 
and lamenting  saying, ‘Aah my ugly head, these sons of men 
with fat bellies and soft bones have truly escaped! ’ Not pausing 
in his desperate  searching  he moaned  as he went. We were all 
hushed in silence, anyone who coughed guaranteed  end to 
himself. The one who moved or rasped some leaf against 
another  summoned  death to his own head. Even animals  knew 
no peace of mind, there was grave silence in the wilderness,  it 
48






was as though  the creatures  of the forest  were mourning  their  
dead. For my own part, I simply  clung  to my tree and began  to 
contemplate  the visage  of the earth.
Not long afterwards,  he re-emerged  and reached  for the tree 
on which  I was perched,  peered  upwards  and down but failed  
to spot me. He rampaged  through  the shrubs and turned  
upwards  once again but I was securely  masked  by the dense  
foliage.  He then turned  his back and began  to head down the 
road. Had I the slightest  guess that he would return soon  
enough,  I would have dismounted  immediately  to hold a 
conversation  with my heels but I sat still. And after a brief  
further  wandering,  he turned  back suddenly  and made directly  
for my tree. He raised  his head and behold,  he spotted  me! 
There  I was, perched  right above  his eyes! When  he perceived  
that I would  need some persuading  getting  down,  he entwined  
himself  to the girth of the tree and began  to shake the tree 
hoping  that I should  lose my hold and fall off but the matter  did 
not turn out the way he wished  it. In fact, my own initial  
thinking  was that he had not really  caught  sight of me but was 
merely  shaking  the tree to see if I was there.  That made me to 
hold my peace  for a while  and I refused  to shift from my place.  
But when  the man noticed  that I was silent still, he pointed  his 
finger  at me and said, ‘Look at the sky and downward,  I have 
seen you, you are within  my hold already ’.
Hearing  this, I found  that it was no use pretending  so 1 rose 
on my feet and began  to climb  downwards.  Half-way,  I applied  
all my strength  and jumped  but it was in his front that I found  
myself.  He threw  himself  at me with such rapidity  but before  he 
could  land over me, 1 had catapulted  to my feet and given the 
motion  to my legs. Hence did trouble  commence  my good  
friends,  Elegbara  rushed  after meat while  I flee from slaughter.  
I did not tire at all and the ghommid  himself  did not pause.  When  
we had raced  for quite  a while  we approached  the entrance  of an 
outsize  hole  and unswerving,  1 dashed  directly  for it, with  the least 
knowledge  that it was the den of a lion which  I embraced.  But 
when  the lion within  observed  how 1 charged  inside  it mistook
49






me for Elegbara  and avoided me and when Elegbara  himself 
emerged,  it decided  that he was the man and began to tug at him. 
They were thus locked in wrestling  and 1 chanced on this to 
retrace  my steps back to the open to get some speed. I was yet to 
clear much space however  when Elegbara  tore the lion into two 
and resumed  his race behind me. Thereafter  we approached  the 
brim of a very deep torrent; the man began to grin to himself 
here thinking  that here at last was the occasion  to corner me. 
But on reaching  the bank, I flew directly  into the deep, preferring  
to drown  than to be slaughtered.  This made the ghommid  to tuck 
the finger  of disappointment  in his mouth,  he folded  his arms and 
watched in silence. He did not bother to pierce the water or 
pursue me any further, instead he snapped  his fingers at me, 
hissed and returned  to the forests  to resume  his travels.
By the time I arrived on the other side of this river I had 
become completely  exhausted,  only a small quantity  of breath 
remained  inside of me. I slumped  and stretched  out resting all 
my weak members,  and it so happened  that it was this same 
moment  that God chose to fan a most desired cold air over the 
entire environs.  For this reason therefore  I stilled myself  on the 
ground where I lay and released myself to sheer contentment  
under this unique  breeze.
I had not been resting for long when a remarkably  beautiful 
lady rose up from an angle and came up towards  me. I tell you, 
mere words can hardly describe  the beauty of this woman.  She 
was garbed in a smart dress and was shining  with tidiness and 
freshness;  her teeth were plastic white and the clarity of her 
eyes was the very suggestion  of moonlight.  Moderately  shaped 
she was, standing, and held a shawl in her hand; a pair of 
ear-rings  hung down her cheeks,  her feet were adorned  by court 
slippers made from brass. She was herself a shiny black in 
complexion,  but hers was the epitome  of an enviable  blackness.
This woman had scarcely  taken notice of me when she burst 
into a smile and began to converse  with me. She asked how it 
was that I came to be in that place on my own at that time and 1 
50






narrated to her the entire tale of our recent encounters.  She 
smiled with me with great ease and comforted  me with her very 
presence  for before her arrival, my mind had been in a state of 
distress, I had in fact begun to wonder why I had barred 
Efegbara  from devouring  me.
The woman rose after a while and fetched me a cup of 
water. This water was ten times colder than the water of the 
river and when she perceived  that I was greatly exhausted,  she 
departed from me again to bring me medicines in a bottle, 
poured me some in a glass cup and I drank. No sooner had I 
drunk the medicine  than a new vitality flooded my body. And it 
was only after 1 had recovered  my lost energy thus that I turned 
to her and began to hold a proper conversation  with her. She 
confided  to me that her mother was a human being but it was to 
a ghommid that she delivered her. I heard also that this 
bog-troll,  her father, was the king of the region where we were, 
so she enjoined me to come with her and know her father’s 
place which she said was only a short distance  but I declined.  I 
declared  that my purpose in that hour was to catch a brief rest 
and that I was really on my way back to the other side of the 
river to be with my companions.
Thereupon  she asked me if I already had a wife and I 
replied that I had none and that such a thought as women had 
not yet occurred  to me: my sole concern  for the moment  was this 
mission to the Mount of Thought in the Forest of a 
Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities. My own thinking at this 
point was that this lady was expressing  her interest in me. It was 
not as if she put that into words, but this was my own reading  of 
her so far. For they are very few indeed among our female folks 
who can look a man in the face and confess that they are 
interested  in him. Not even if that man’s love intoxicated  them 
like hot wine or possessed them as the spirit of a deity 
possesses  his vestals.
The lady took great care of me and it was her affair which 
led me to the conclusion  that affection begets atfection; for 
before this time, I had developed  a very stern attitude towards
51






women. I believe that it was my own nature which disagreed  
with those creatures  and persisted  in locking them out of my 
mind. When the moment  came for me to part with this one, I 
found to my utter surprise that I was very near to tears, even 
though I had up till this point not conceived  the slightest  idea 
about befriending  her, much less consider  making  her my wdfe.
It was she also who arranged  how we finally escaped  from 
the hands of Elegbara.  Suddenly  while we were yet conversing  
she called out to her junior brother and he answered  her and 
appeared.  She instructed  him to fetch her a canoe and paddle 
us to the other side, and he obeyed. But just as we were 
stepping into the canoe she asked about Filasayepo.  This 
astonished  me and she, seeing my astonishment,  explained  that 
Filasayepo  and herself  were cousins;  his father was the younger 
brother  ofher own father and both men were junior brothers  to 
Olokun,  the lord of oceans. Her father’s name was Ajedubule,  
he was the immediate  elder brother  of the father of Filasayepo.  
She had already known about the miraculous cap in 
Filasayepo ’s custody  and she opined that we had lo Find him out 
of that forest first since the spirit residing  in his cap should  be of 
much assistance  to us.On arriving  on the other side she ordered  her brother  who 
was himself  a ghommid  to go in search of Filasayepo  and bring 
him to us. Hardly  had she issued this command  when the youth 
vanished,  resurfacing  again in the air after about ten minutes 
flying Filasayepo  down on his shoulders.
Filasayepo  and this ghommid  were greatly overjoyed  when 
they set eyes on each other, they hugged and exchanged  
affectionate  greetings. That done, she asked Filasayepo  to 
produce  the spirit of his cap and he did so; this spirit when he 
stepped  out was squat and very stout, he had an outsize hunch 
on his back and was also very hairy, like the hair on the skin of 
a beast. The lady conversed  with him in a language  which was 
foreign to us, afterwards, the spirit stooped down and 
suggested  that I climb on his back. He had hardly allowed me 
to sit when we both floated up into the high skies and 
52






began to fly away.
This manner of flight scared me a little at first but I soon 
overcame  my fear and settled myself in comfort  on the back of 
the spirit. I grabbed  at the fur of his body and clung tight to the 
hunch of his back lest I should  fall off.
Before long we approached  a highway which I soon dis­
covered  to be the road leading to the Forest of Elegbeje.  We 
touched  down here and he left me to depart, pausing  to assure 
me however  that we were now long past the haunt of Elegbara.  
He assured  me also that if I remained  on that spot he would be 
returning  with the rest of my friends.  Even so did I choose  a place 
for myself  by the wayside  and lowered  my buttocks  upon the roots 
of a tree while the man fetched  my companions  to me one by one.
It did not take very long after this before  he flew in the last man 
and thus were we all reassembled  again on the road of our 
destination.  But on close observation,  I detected  the absence  of 
one man from our midst, his name was Igbin-eniyan  or the 
Human  Snail. It was the nature of this man which earned him 
his name for he was an extremely slow person in all his 
undertakings.  When he took his stroll he could not be hurried, 
likewise  did he prefer to take his time when he spoke; urgency 
was a total stranger  to him. The absence  of this man puzzled  us 
greatly and yet the spirit had declared when he brought 
Ojuayedun  over that he had brought us the last man and that 
no other man was left in the forest. We pondered  this matter 
back and front before we finally decided that Olojumajele  
should take a look through  his elephant ’s tusk and investigate  
the matter for us. Olojumajele  checked over and over again 
with the aid of the screen in his tusk but he could not spot any 
trace of the missing  man. Even then, he caught a brief glimpse 
of Elegbara  liimself  and what he held in his hand was a cause 
of bafflement  for us — he greatly feared that the meat which 
Elegbara  held in his hand was a human corpse. We took the 
object from him and peered through at Elegbara  ourselves,  
and behold,  there was no doubt about it, Elegbara  had snatched
53






our man apparently  and had torn him to shreds; we espied 
Elegbara  with our own eyes blowing air through the skull oi 
our beloved  comrade,  the Human  Snail.
Ibembe-Olokunrun  was the only man of the lot who did not 
procure any bruise and this was a wonder to us all. Knowing 
that he was such a fat man, he did not bother himself with 
climbing up hills and slopes as we did when Elegbara put 
confusion  into our midst. The man simply slipped through a 
leafy truss somewhere  and held his peace there.
We waited here and took a short rest; each man recounted  
the tale of how he had fared during this brief encounter  with 
the savage creature,  Elegbara.  We gave our thanks to the spirit 
of Filasayepo  before he returned  to his place in the hat of our 
friend.  That done we rose up once again and turned to the path 
in our front, voyaged  on until night fell without  witnessing  any 
disturbance.  The only semblance of pestilence which we 
experienced  during this time was in the form of wails we got 
from Ibembe Olokunrun.  He groaned aloud for want ot 
something  to eat and he did not pause until the dawn of the 
third day when we appeared  before the community  of the wild 
beasts. These animals  did not bother to turn away from us, not 
until we had actually  arrived too close to their fat bodies. We 
slaughtered  many of the creatures and made a large feast; 
Ibembe  Olokunrun  performed  a great feat here, he unleashed  a 
great carnage  and ate them up to the very last.
- V,.;fi :-ni
aUi. I\): iJiit jrfijdbw
'd 'to
-. ■ - - id - m. vA la
>. E-icdsd  bnig
54






A THE TOWN  OF EDIDARE  WHERE  
DOUBLE-FOOLISHNESS
IS KING OVER  THEM
We left the town of beasts  and covered  more  distance  in the 
direction  of our goal before  we came across  a path branching  
to the left. Observable  on this spot was a sign-post  which  
conveyed  this message,  ‘The Town of Edidare  where king 
Double-foolishness  rules upon them. ’ These words were an 
astonishment  for us but we turned  our feet into the path all the 
same,  resolving  to know  what the place  was about.
Before  long, after we had trekked  on this road for a little 
while  we began  to catch  a glimpse  of the settlement  itself  ahead  
of us, but it was with increasing  amazement  that we found  the 
path to be narrowing  as we continued  on it, giving the 
impression  that no man lived in the place.  Soon afterwards,  we 
entered  into the town ’s centre.
I tell you this, my good friends,  I am yet to know any other  
place  on this earth which  boasts  greater  filth than this town of 
which  I speak,  for odours  began  to bid us welcome  long before  
we had come within view of the mid-town.  It was doubtful  
whether  any broom  had bothered  to sweep  the entire market  
once since eternity.  Also, according  to their custom,  only the 
aged sold things in the market,  only they must hawk wares  
around  and yet the number  of heads  which  we counted  in the 
entire market-place  did not surpass  fifty, heads  which mostly 
were overtaken  by the grey-hair.  Their population  would  
indeed  have been more than this but for the fact that they died 
early  in the town.  They  displayed  their wares  on garbage  heaps,  
strutted  about  in the open  naked  and bathed  only once in three  
years.  For this reason  filth covered  the entire  citizenry  from  their  
heads  to their feet, to such  an extent  that crumbs  of dirt dropped  
off from their bodies  when  they walked  past. This, to my mind, 
was the reason  why craw-craw  was of such great abundance  in 
the place. Even so, that which  they possessed  and which  sur-
55






passed  craw-craw  was the sore ol the Icel, deep  and fluid-soaked  
sores  which  stood as fashion  for the nobility.  Slim leaves  could  
not suffice  to cover them and liquids  dripped  out ol them al 
regular  intervals.  Lice and bugs of assorted  kinds  took reluge  in 
their  clothes  and heads,  those  insects  had camped  on their  bodies  
in such  large  numbers  because  they  found  exceeding  comfort  on 
them.  There  was scarcely  a spot on the skin of the people  of 
Edidare  which  jigger  had not yet punctured;  jiggers  raised  storey ­
buildings  on the soles of their feet and built bungalows  on their  
buttocks,  but lice constructed  their own palaces  on their skulls.  
Their  fingernails  were  sharper  than matchets,  so much  that when 
they scratched  their bodies  the sound of their scratching  
resembled  that of the hoe ploughing  forests.  Drinking  water  in 
the place  was a matter  for sadness  for even while  they had a very 
small  stream  up and down  the town,  it was even there  that they 
directed  their excrements.
After we had taken note of the marketplace  and beheld their 
ways which was as unspeakable  as I have just outlined, we 
resolved  amongst  our fellows that we would pitch tent nearby 
and observe this people even more for a couple of-days. The 
space which we appropriated  for this purpose was only a 
fifteen minutes  walk from the township;  we were careful  to pick 
a spot of such considerable  distance  because  we wished to be 
detached  from the natives  as much as possible.
What was most unseemly about this people was their 
conduct amongst themselves.  According  to their judgement,  
life belonged  to the youths, the elder counted for nothing. In 
the morning  the father went round the compound  in search of 
his children  and prostrated  himself  before each one of them in 
salutation.  Mothers greeted their daughters  also kneeling. It 
was the youth who sent elders on errands  and when elders and 
young  ones dined together it was mandatory  for the elder to 
wash the plates after. Women engaged in the most strenous 
tasks excepting  once in a long while when their men gave them 
a helping  hand. The women  cultivated  the land and when their 
56






yams were ripe, they ploughed  them up and placed them over 
the heads of their husbands  to transport  home. When a young 
man carried something  of considerable  weight in his hand and 
emerged  in the street, the elders scrambled  to their feet and 
took it from him. Also, when old folks took their children  to the 
farm, the old ones bore the loads back to the house. And even 
while on the farm the most elderly gathered  straws together  to 
make fire and cook with them.
The citizens of Edidare  never buried their dead. Whenever  
one of them dropped  dead, food had arrived! For they feasted 
on their dead bodies in the town. Even so they never 
deliberately  seize hold of anyone alive to kill for food, they 
usually ensured that a man has actually given up. the ghost 
before they set about hacking him apart. When a number of 
them died at a go, they stored their bodies in the backyard  and 
picked them up one after another until they exhausted  their 
stock. And even while it is the truth that they spread their meat 
over fire to roast before they ate them, they had yet to know the 
advantage  of seasoning  meat for the purpose  of preservation,  so 
that when they had stored bodies for three days and perceived  
that those were beginning  to decay, they sent out word to their 
neighbours  and invited  them to a big feast saying,  ‘we are making 
offering,  so that God might endow  us with longevit/.
They possessed also a most unusual idea about the 
construction  of houses;  all their houses lacked  windows,  to such 
extent that free air was denied passage  through  them and their 
roomlets  remained  in perpetual  darkness.  Weeds they had for 
roofing and when rain fell flood overtook  the homesteads  and 
the floors of rooms were drenched  wet. They spread leaves on 
the ground in the night to sleep upon and stones served them 
for pillows, for indeed mats were completely  foreign to. them in 
the place.
As I have recounted  to you earlier on, clothes were a rare 
affair in this town; for even while their compounds  were usually 
large irf-siz6, an entire household  might not own more than a
57






single cloth. Hence they drew up a time-table  whereby the 
cloth came to each member  of the compound  on specified  days 
of the week. For instance, if the inhabitants  of a house 
approached  thirty, the cloth was available  to each person only 
once in a month. As a result of this, they plucked  leaves during 
the harmattan  season and used them in place of coverlets.
Doubtless  you would have begun to guess that a land which 
encompassed  such a large quantity  of filth must harbour  within 
it a considerable  amount  of sick people.  There is no single place 
on this earth whose diseases out-number  those 
of the town of Edidare where Doubled-foolishness  was king 
over them. Even if we place the matter of the filth aside, how 
are we to render account  for their complete  lack of windows  or 
for the damp floors of their houses? What should give more 
ill-health  to a man than these things?
The history  of the town which we gathered  went thus:
A large city indeed  was this town in the days of old, it took 
a whole three days to trek from one end of it to another. 
But what brought  such regress  to it was the absence  of unity 
amongst  its inhabitants.  Individualists  they were, everyone 
of them, such that there had been none of their kind before 
their time and neither would any such come to be in the 
hereafter.  Envy had such firm roots inside it that a father 
ensured that he disclosed  nothing to his son; mothers 
barred  their own daughters  from observing  how they made 
their soup. The consequence  of this being simply that — 
what one man knew  was not available  to his neighbour,  and 
so did their wisdom  perish.
Some time had gone by after our arrival in this town before 
we decided  to know their king in person.  The cause for our late 
decision  to visit him was this despicable  state of affairs in his 
domain. Consequently  we had no high opinion of their ruler, 
whoever he was; for no king of worth would, while his eyes 
remained  wide open, permit his territory  to deteriorate  to such 
lamentable  condition  of collapse.
58






What  rendered  a visitation  to their king unavoidable  was the 
issue of the disease  of small-pox  whieh  was common  sight in the 
town, for the disease  had caused  the death of many people  
even since  the time of our arrival  in the place  and we felt that a 
problem  like this was best pondered  in the presence  of their  
ruler.  We despatched  a messenger  to the palace  of the king to 
book an appointment  for us. The king replying,  suggested  that 
we report  in the palace  at eight-thirty  the following  morning,  
saying  he would  like to grant  us an audience  in that hour.
We breakfasted  early the following  morning  and prepared  
ourselves  for the visit to the king ’s place.  We arrived  there  at a 
quarter  past the hour and waited.  After fifteen minutes  we 
watched  a man emerge  from the interior  of the palace  and we 
explained  our mission  to him. This fellow  turned  back inside 
and returned  again  to tell us that the king had gone  to the farm.  
We waited  a while  after this thinking  he was probably  due back  
in a moment  but that to no avail,  so we returned  to our camp.
In the late evening  we sent our messenger  to inquire  
whether  the king had returned  but king Double-  foolishness  had 
yet to come  back home.
We woke up early the day following  and waited  until it was 
nearly the hour when kings customarily  attended  to visitors 
from amongst  their  town  folks  before  we sent out another  word  
to the king. He replied  that he would  be unable  to see us on 
this day because  of much exhaustion  resulting  from the fact 
that he brought  a very heavy load back on his head from the 
farm the previous  evening.  He advised  us to look forward  to the 
next day instead,  at nine O’clock in the morning;  this would  be 
the third  day after our first effort.
We reached  the palace sharp on the hour of nine the 
following  morning;  we even feared initially that we were  
arriving  late until we reached  there and found  that we arrived  
sharp on the hour. No sooner  had we touched  down than we 
found  a man lurking  about the gate, so we sent word through  
him to the interior  of the palace.  Our courier  took his time
59






before  he returned  with the following  news: the king had gone  
back to the farm on an urgent  mission,  for it had just been  
found that the yams he brought  home the previous  evening  
would  not suffice  the entire members  of the king ’s house.  We 
held on for a short while after this expecting  that he might not 
take very long, but there we lied and after we had waited  until 
we were nearly  weary  of waiting,  we returned  to our own house,  
leaving  a message  behind  that we came.
In the night I sent a youth to the palace  to see whether  
Double-foolishness  had returned  and he had indeed  returned;  
he bade us try our luck again the next morning  at nine-thirty,  
but even on that day the king evaded  us as in the previous  
times. Even so did we try vainly to pin an elusive king 
Double-foolishness  to his house.
We were not to bag success  until the seventh  day, on the eve 
of which  he had asked  us to call on him at noon on the seventh  
day. But we decided  not to bother  our own heads  about that 
noon arrangement,  instead  we resolved  to go even before  the 
stipulated  time. We set out on time and reached  there at ten 
and thi.s was the first time we encountered  the man.
I want you all to realise that our messenger  never  
himself  beheld  this king. He usually  got our messages  across  to 
him through  some middlemen  within  the palace  and how we 
ourselves  met him will be a source  of astonishment  to you, 
without  a doubt.
The palace  of king Double-foolishness  could not match a 
farmhouse  in term.s  of its beauty;  it was surrounded  by a wall no 
taller than two feet. When we arrived  in this morning  ol the 
seventh  day, we noticed  a man sitting  over the wall, strapped  al 
his groin  by ibante.  He had a certain  tall cap on and was neither  
dressed  in trousers  nor shirt, nor shoes even for that matter.  
This was the man we first encountered  outside  and we rejoiced  
greatly  on seeing  him for we were looking  forward  to making  
him the bearer of our message  into the interior of the 
compound,  so that the king might  be privileged  to know  of our 
60






presence  on time. In the past we usually found it hard to get 
someone  who would take our word into the house.
We went to this man the moment  we approached  the wall 
and begged him to inform the king of our arrival. The fellow 
pretended  to hear us to the end, upon which he demanded  to 
know what business  we had with the king and we replied that 
we had no desire to discuss that with anyone except the king 
himself. But this man continued  to insist on being intimated  
with the nature of our mission and we grew truly furious 
thinking  he was planning  to ask a bribe of us.
We were yet to resolve this little affair when another man 
came up to us from within the palace and prostrated  himself 
flat before the fellow with whom we had been conversing,  he 
praised  him with these words, ‘kabiyesi,  the king of honour,  you 
are the deputy  of gods’. This manner  of greeting  was surprising  
to us but we decided  inside our minds that this was definitely  
how the people hailed the servants of the king in the place. 
When the man on the wall had acknowledged  the salutation,  he 
informed this fellow who prostrated to him that we 
who stood in his front were the voyaging  strangers  in the town 
and that it amazed  him to think that we had failed to detect his 
identity.  The second man then turned to us and explained  that 
we were in the very presence  of king Double-foolishness  himself, 
the ruler of the town of Edidare.
When the man had enlightened  us in this manner,  we asked 
him to forgive us for failing to recognise  him on time. But this 
only served to anger the king and he burst out at us thus,
‘You who are lacking in reasoning, men of little 
understanding!  Do you dare to opine that this sitting of mine 
does not suggest the sitting of a king? Or even this clothing  of 
mine?  And if indeed you understand  nothing  at all, do you fail 
also to perceive  the importance  of this ibante in which I drape 
myself? Have you become  so blinded,  to the extent that it has 
also failed to enter your thick skulls that this thing which I wear 
is a crown? And does this magnifi  cient place which serves me
61






for a palace,  whose fame has sounded  through  the whole earth 
mean nothing  at all to you? Where is the king to match me for 
strength? Have you encountered  that man more discerning  
than me? And tell me this - is there such a king in the world 
who suffers from such conceit as to declare that his domain  is 
more beautiful  than mine? You who possess an eye and know 
not the use of it! Take warning  today, gentlemen,  for if you do 
not watch out, I shaH wrestle with the whole lot of you one by 
one before you leave this town. ’
This was the maimer  in which the king addressed  us and his 
speech terrified us greatly. It was purely a mouth-widening  
experience  to watch a man who reigned over such festering 
settlement  boasting that there was none like him the whole 
world over. It occurred  to me hence, beginning  from this day, 
that he is a unique fool in the community  of fools who though  is 
himself a lacker of thought, goes round the whole town 
boasting  that he has much wisdom in his keeping.  For when a 
man has a stunted  wisdom  in his hands but actually  thinks that 
he has unsurpassable  wisdoms,  how shall he borrow  valid truth 
from the vast resource  of wiser heads?
When I realised that the king had ended his piece, I rose to 
give him his reply but Ayederu-eda  overtook  me in this bid and 
began to address  the king thus,
‘Kabiycsi,  1 am most pleased  to know you today.Do  not take 
offence that we did not recognise  you immediately;  it was not 
everyone of us who failed in that, I for one had noted the 
importance  of your sitting from the very moment  when I caught 
sight of you. To some other persons this town may not be a 
particularly  habitable  place but I am willing to assure the king 
that I who stand speaking  to you this minute has enjoyed this 
place beyond description;  I clearly am not one of those people 
who speak ill of your kingdom.  And I shall wish His Highness  
to see in me only a friend. I greet and greet you again, I 
commend  your efforts over this beautiful palace on which 
undoubtedly  you have expended much to construct. I give 
62






regard  to this town;  and once again  you must not take offence  
with me or any of my friends.  Kabiyesi,  Kabiyesi,  I make  
obeisance ’.
It was a member  of our company,  Ayederu-eda  who 
rendered  this speech,  the same man who gave me a large feast  
in his hometown  that other  time and whom  I have appointed  to 
be my second-in-command  for this voyage  to the forest of 
Elegbeje.
Ayederti-eda  was hardly  allowed  to round  up when  many  of 
bur companions  who had by now taken  their seats on the wall 
began  to show eagerness  to speak.  Filasayepo  rose to his feet, 
Kumodiran  also, and Poisonous-eyes.  All of these men rose at 
once; for my own part, I had also resolved  to rise but when I 
observed  the eagerness  of my comrades,  I held on to my peace  
and bade  Filasayepo  and Olojumajele  sit for Kumodiran  to have  
his say, since  he was indeed  the first to spring  up to his feet.
Kumodiran  was most unsparing  in his address  and this 
terrified  me. He spoke  most fearlessly,  needling  the king of the 
town  thus:
‘Double-foolishness,  I am most displeased  to know  you this 
day. The man who chose  that name  which  you bear has yet to 
invent  your actual name for you. This is really because  your 
foolishness  surpasses  a mere double, your foolishness  is 
multiple  foolishness.  Can you not see that ignorance  has 
blinded  you completely,  so that your territory  grows  from bad 
to worse everyday?  And do you have the effontery  to raise a 
voice to speak  still? Pig-head!  With that stomach  as huge as a 
palm-nut  sack, and yet you gloat over the ignoble  thing  you call 
ibante — does any self-respecting  king go about draped  in 
ancient  skirts?  And your long cap too! If you are not indeed  
plagued  by blindness,  would  you say that that cap — your  crown — 
is better  than any of the caps on our own heads?  Today  marks  
the seventh  day since we began to fix appointments  to see 
you and you have consistently  played  the evasive  ruffian  on 
each occasion  and still you do not pause to examine  your
03






thought  for one moment.  1 give you this assurance  this day, that 
- I am yet to know any other place more disgusting  than this 
town;  the world  has tilted  past this present  course  on which  you 
tread and you must retreat  into yourself  and make fresh plans  
lest progress  should  elude  you forever.  We have come this far 
to share an important  word with you. Like it or not, you will 
listen  and if we perceive  that there is no other  way to persuade  
you, we will unleash  force over your head — if that is the only 
language  you understand.  This is all 1 have to say for now. ’
Even so did Kumodiran  address  the king, and when he had 
done  with speaking,  I noticed  that all our comrades  were made  
happy  by his speech  and none of them showed  any further  
anxiety  to speak.  There  was much sting in Kumodiran  and he 
frightened  me greatly  that his manner  of utterance  would  lead 
to warfare  between  the king and ourselves.  However,  I needed  
not have worried  at all for on hearing  Kumodiran,  King  
Double-foolishness  merely  cracked  into laughter  and cackled  
until he fell off from his seat on the wall. When his laughter  
eventually  died out, he turned to his man and bade him 
conduct  us inside  and be seated,  saying  he would  be with us in a 
short moment.
The interior  of Double-foolishness ’ house  differed  a lot from  
the interior  of the homes  of the other  kings  I have known.  Even  
while  it is customary  for Yoruba  kings  to build  the apartment  of 
their wives in the centre  of the court, it was not so with king 
Double-foolishness.  The home of his wives was right by the 
entrance  to the palace.  We were even  further  astonished  to find 
that it was into the very apartment  of his wives that we were  
led, and the women  swanked  all over the place  stark naked.
Soon after we had taken our seats, three men entered  and 
also selected  spaces  for themselves  inside  the room.  I drew in a 
number  of lessons  from their conversation  which threw  more  
light on the behaviour  of king Double-foolishness  and the 
nature  of relationship  he forged  with his people.  The views of 
the men about their king was as follows:  Outside  his narrow  
64






circle of advisers,  king Double-foolishness  gave no regard  to 
anyone  up and down the kingdom.  He turned  deaf ears on the 
nobility  and other men of wealth;  he barred  all of them from  
sitting with him in judgement.  And so, this king courted  
disgrace  after disgrace  for he failed  to realise  tha,t there were  
such men in a kingdom  who encompassed  qualities  which  could  
be made useful  to the throne,  be it in the form of wisdom,  or 
sheer discerning  or wealth.  The man who heads a town must  
throw  his doors  wide to all and draw  all and sundry  to himself.
We had been seated  for a while  before  the king sent his most  
senior wife to us, instructing  her to conduct  us round the 
interior  of his house. This woman  was fat and swarthy  and 
naked  right to her buttocks.  What  intrigued  us most about  this 
tour was that, whenever  we entered  into a room the woman  
ensured  that she called  our attention  to virtually  everything  in 
the room, sparing  nothing  at all. When  she found coins in a 
box, she counted  them to us; when  we approached  a protective  
charm  in a corner  of the room  she pointed  it to us. She actually  
meant  to open the pit of excrements  to us when we blundered  
into their dug-out  pit latrine  but we protested  just in time. She 
unveiled  the king ’s secrecies  before us and recounted  the 
amount  of money  the king owed his subjects  and who those  
creditors  were.  It was this same  day that we heard  the names  of 
those the king held as his confidants  and those he regarded  as 
his enemies.  Also, the views of the king on each one of his 
advisers  was given us. She unlocked  the pantry  and made sure 
that we knew how many pieces of meat were left in the 
stew-pot.  Nor did the king ’s wife pause here, she told us the 
names  of the other  wives  of her husband  and admitted  us to ihe 
secrets  of the homes  of everyone  of them. When finally,  she 
embarked  on a narration  of the amount  of affection  the king 
had for each one of his wives, 1 was alarmed  and raised an 
objection,  but the woman  defended  herself  by saying  she was 
carrying  out the precise  instruction  of her husband.
In the end when we came back to our previous  room and 
returned  to our former  seats, we found that the king had not
65






yet surfaced.  Not long after this, one of the women  of the house  
sent a servant to inform the king that the yam she was 
cooking  in the backyard  was ready  for pounding  and that the 
king should  hurry up — since he was normally  expected  to 
pound  yams  for his wives.
We began to hear the sound of pounding  from the yard 
thereafter  but this soon stopped  abruptly  and shouts  came up 
from  the same  direction  in their place,  including  the running  of 
feet; we heard  that it was the king fighting  one of his wives.  This 
made  us troop to the yard but before  our arrival  on the spot,  
the calamity  had occurred;  the king ’s wife had flattened  her 
husband  and we found  her sitting  astride  the king, serving  him 
with incessant slaps. The matter was simply past 
dumbfoundment;  we plunged  into the middle  of the two and 
rescued  the king  from  the hands  of the woman.
But the king apparently  had not had enough  of the fight.  
He began  to boast  once out of the woman ’s grip that he should  
have overturned  her had we not come  to his rescue  at the time 
we did. And before  we could  guess  what was at stake,  the king 
broke  free from our hands  and dashed  at the woman  who took 
him up from his feet in a moment  and slammed  his head  
against  the floor.  This time it was the king ’s own relations  who 
hastened  to his rescue but since he would not desist from  
boasting  out aloud, there was no remedy  but for the fight to 
begin all over again a third time. Even so, this third contest  
preferred  no triumph  for king Double-foolishness;  in short,  
that woman  felled the man on seven whole occasions  before  
she paused.  After this seventh  bout, it was the king who 
disentangled  himself  from her hands  and rose up in full flight  
and the woman  sped after him. It took a long while  before  the 
woman  finally  agreed  to abandon  the race and return  home.
When  the king ’s wife had retreated  home,  we all went after  
the king in his hiding place and set ourselves  the task of 
brushing  the dust from his head. The king himself  dusted  his 
own buttocks  which had turned  mud-red  as a result of the 
66






belabouring  he had just got from the woman. We were busy 
with dusting the king when one of the king’s men addressed  
him saying, ‘Kabiyesi,  did she not beat you less today than the 
last time?’ And the king replied  the man in this manner,  ‘you are 
very right there. I have improved  as you can see, I am only just 
getting  used to her hand. Did you not observe  how I raised her 
limp up and actually planned to over-turn  her? And I came 
very close to doing that, but for the good-for-nothing  dirt which 
stuck in my toe I should have dashed her back to the ground. 
Then another  man asked the king as follows: ‘I hope her kicks 
were not as devastating  today? ’ To which he answered  again 
thus, ‘I felt those kicks a little I must admit but none hit me on a 
sensitive spot’. But another sympathizer  still questioned  him 
like-this,  ‘what of your crown Kabiyesi,  where is it?’ He replied, 
‘It fell into a river while she walloped  me’. Next came the turn 
of Kumodiran  who probed the man thus, ‘How did it all begin 
Kabiyesi? ’ And he began to explain like this, ‘I was 
concentrating  on the yam I was pounding,  doing my work in 
silence when the woman walked up to me and sneered saying 
all I possessed  was a pair of weak arms, asking everyone 
around  to observe  how feebly I held the pestle. I asked her to 
let me alone but she would not desist, I did not speak any 
further than this when a loud slap sounded on my ear. This 
made me bend down and make for her feet, but I had no 
sooner bent than I collected  a kick on my head which caused 
me to reel back and knock the rear of my head against the 
grinding  stone. Did you imagine  it was a small matter?  I almost 
broke my head in the encounter,  my head aches badly this 
minute.  But then you would not be surprised  by her conduct  if 
you knew her history,  that was how her mother  broke the head 
of her father and ended up in prison. She hails from the 
breeding house of head-breakers ’. When he had paused I 
decided  that I might as well put in 5 question,  ‘If you knew that 
she was from such a bad home, you ought not have married  her 
in the first place’. And the king replied, ‘Can you not see for
67






yourself  how uncommonly  beautiful  she is? Lei me tell you, she 
has herself  served prison terms thrice, 1 married  her three days 
after she left prison for the third time. She attracted me 
indescribably ’.
King Double-foolishness  had not yet finished  with explaining  
when another townsman  approached  us from the far distance, 
dripping  tears of sympathy  for his king. He wailed to the king 
thus, ‘Kabiyesi  you had better improve  your skills, it is shameful 
to us to have an ordinary woman punish our ruler in this 
manner  everyday.  You had better improve  Kabiyesi,  for you are 
shaming  us’. These words only made the king angry and he 
grumbled  back in this manner,  ‘let that shame mount the heads 
of the lot of you twice over if you like, as if you are blind and 
cannot see for yourself  how bulky she is’. After this Filasayepo  
pestered him with this comment, ‘you shouldn ’t 
have married her if you knew you couldn ’t control  .her and 
Double-foolishness  became extremely  curt: ‘Have I not told 
you block-heads  that I married her because she attracts me?’ 
Ayederu-eda  then said ‘I know for certain that if the woman 
should  chance  on you this moment,  you would flog noiisense  out 
of her.’ This pleased  him no end and he grinned,  saying, ‘I can 
tell you this with certainty  that if she dares to berate herself  by 
coming  up again then it is her doom she has come to meet. This 
for the single reason that I am now quite accustomed  to her 
techniques,  her hand presents no mystery to me any longer. 
Take another look at me, I am not that kind of man who 
humbles himself before a woman let me tell you, no never! 
What kind of man did you people take me for? A husband  who 
licks the boots of his woman?  My wrapper  is tight bound. ’
My good friends,  the king had hardly paused  when suddenly 
someone  cried a warning  to him that the woman was near at 
hand again. And did the king wait to hear another  word? He fled 
into the winds instantly and the woman raced after him, the 
matter  then turned  into - ‘If you cannot  go, why don’t you vacate 
the path for me.’ If you had espied  the golf of the king’s head froni 
behind,  you would  burst helplessly  into laughter;  we laughed  and 
68






laughed  until we nearly  somersaulted  seven times  over, for the 
king ’s baek-head  was abnormally  elongated  and eurved  back ­
wards  like the mussle  of a hoe. While  the flight  lasted,  the king  s 
ibante  cut its cords  and he held it from falling  off with his hands  
while  he darted  into the wilderness.
The woman  retired  home before  long and we went and 
sought  the man out in a corner  where  he tucked  himsell.  We 
tried to converse  with him but he motioned  us to bring our 
voices down lest his huntress  should  overhear.  It was this 
which led us to suggest  to him that we should  retire to our 
habitation  for the meantime  since  it was apparent  that we could  
not hold any meaningful  discussion  with him in that state. He 
reasoned  with us and asked us to call again before  dusk. This 
done,  we vacated  the court  of the king of Edidare  and returned  
to our residence.
We called  at the king ’s palace  again after dusk and we met 
the king fully composed;  he gave his attention  to us on that 
occasion.  Even so this king belonged  in the category  of men 
who held a very high opinion  of themselves  and believed  that 
they are superior  to all other men in knowledge,  such 
individuals  are fond of arguing  out the least significant  point  in 
a discourse  and would never hear others to the end. We 
proposed  it to King Double-foolishness  that small-pox  was not 
a good  thing  but he assured  us that there  was nothing  like it. He 
even professed  that if a man has not yet experienced  the 
disease then he has scarcely  experienced  civilization.  We 
opined  that it was wrong  to have sufferers  from small-pox  and 
none-sufferers  live together  as we observed  it done in the town  
but the king protested  that he saw nothing  wrong  with that. We 
told him also that there was an excess  of filth in the place and 
that it was the cause  of disease,  but he asked  us to be quiet  and 
called  us liars.  . ...It surprised  me a lot to find that even at that time when  the 
practice  of marking  the body as a means  of prevention  against  
small-pox  was virtually  unknown  to the rest of the world,  it had
69






been long in practice  in the town of Edidare.  Its story goes 
thus. In the olden times, one of the unique  bailiffs  of heaven  
was sent out into the earth annually,  his name  was Light. The 
Lord sent him out to observe  the deeds  of men and to make a 
report. This man often transformed  himself into various  
shapes;  sometimes  he took the shape  of a child, at other times  
he emerged  as an adult.  One year,  he transformed  himself  into a 
very old man, placed  a luggage  on his head and took his place  
very close  to the gate of the town of Edidare.  And it so occurred  
that the town ’s prince — the eldest son of the 
reigning  monarch  — was passing  by on his way to the farm  
when he took notice of this old man on the wayside.  They  
exchanged  greetings  and the man begged  the prince  to help 
him for a short  distance  with his burden,  the prince  agreed,  and 
they continued  their trek together.  Soon they came near to a 
certain  torrent  and the king ’s son swam  across  with the old man s 
luggage. Next, the old man suggested  that he also 
help him across  on his back, to which also the prince  did not 
argue,  picked  up the man and swam  with him to the other  side. 
Now when they had both arrived  on the other side of the 
torrent,  the man re-transformed  himself  into a giant, glowing  
from his head to his feet and white  as snow.  He gave a reply  to 
the prince in this manner,  ‘You have performed  an act of 
kindness  towards  me, therefore,  I will also repay  with kindness.  
From  this very day, I shall send my servants  to this town every  
year for the purpose  of marking  your bodies  against  the disease  
of small-pox,  dnd it shall come to pass that, whosoever  shall 
release  his body for marking  shall not perish  by small-pox,  even 
if the entire earth was coming  to gradual  ruination  from the 
hands  of small-pox. ’
This is the history  of small-pox  vaccination  in the town.
We counselled  that the king should  submit  himself  to be 
marked  but he declared  that he was having  nothing  to do with 
it, so we left his palace.
When  after six days I called  on the king, the state in which  1 
met him terrified  me greatly.  Small-pox  had covered  him from
70






his head to his toes and he was groaning from its pains at 
regular intervals.  Likewise  was he unable to speak and I was 
full of pity for him. Another  seven days passed after this before 
we heard that the king had died.
ifi
irs'
Ji
iB^il  %i{] tnriJjw  iu lit„r I iwiiw ■jitiii J, 
:t iJ’WS[fl 
id. f
K;:*!hWi, ’'ftri;>rnY
' A’Wf  iiv;j vl
Kw SrniJi ?,in
IRJ JO jnjfnofKnntfiQKUJ 1
- - -ri'M
ni) jG ft'iuiji  01 omoil
■-I' L'ui j/tijiifun
■I" boprfm*x!fi^3n
.'■jj .
■jj . o;
■ ',;'b<phT.
JI ;?£3n
■ ( ■ '■ J ?lnow juio
.■' ■.jJ.ioilf'
4 i ift jOn
i'lnrf liiGJb b-^Ttraab  alqojq 
' .s-Hbi 3W£,5t»b  11(11
..J'- > J J
'ij . ! V'/J. ..ij;- .nolod
■’ t J.;WH
' J. ■( ,jn
. •ivJiH')!
■ jjlhorT;
< JViJ; / ‘(i '
. iijfi!) jiii J
11






TRIPLE-FOOLISHNESS  ASCENDS  TO 
THE  THRONE,
SMALL-POX  SNATCHES  
DOUBLE-FOOLISHNESS  AWAY
This was where my visitor  paused  for the day and we all 
retired  to rest, greeted  all who have assembled  and bade them  
go home  to return  again  early  the following  morning.
The next morning  had hardly  arrived  before  folks from the 
neighbourhood  began  to flock into my house,  and after we had 
taken  breakfast,  my visitor  took his seat and began  once again  
to soeak ’ he recommenced  his narration  thus:?Xn<ls,  1 slopped  yesterday  al the death  of Double-foolish ­
ness;  this morning,  it is also from  his death  that «e shall resume  
our work. Let US proceed.  .
The attitude  of the people  of Edidare  to the death  of their  
king was a great astonishment  for me. When  I visited  the king s 
place, I met all the townspeople  making  merry and when 
asked the cause of their jubilation  from a fellow  close by, he 
replied  me like this, ‘we are all rejoicing  because  this is meat m 
abundance;  the buttocks  of Double-foolishness  is fleshy, his 
belly is rotund and bulky, he is himself  robust from his 
shoulders  to the calves  of his legs, the meat of his buttocks  will 
not fail to ooze delicious  juices  into our mouths ’. None  ol these  
people  desired  death  for himself,  but each one of them awaited  
the demise  of his neighbour;  it was a uniquely  evil town.
Seven days passed after the de'ath of Double-foolishness  
before  the people  crowned  his heir m his place,  his name was 
Triple-foolishness.  Three days after the enthronement  of the 
new king, we prepared  and headed  for hi.s palace  to pay hun 
courtesy  in accordance  with our status as visitors in his 
territory.  Thi.s happened  also to be the Tirst time when  I met his 
mother  whose  name  was llaburu.
They  gave us much regard  and honoured  us wiAm  the hmts  
of their understanding;  on the part of the king ’s mother,  
72






Ilaburu,  she had ensured  that the whole  lot of us was treated  to 
a single  lobe of kola. We also went to see the younger  brother  
of Triple-foolishness,  whose  name  was Danasungbo.  The new 
king was senior  to this man by one year and a half. Even so 
Danasungbo ’s conducts  did not aspire  to the role of a king ’s 
brother.  For rather  than us prostrating  ourselves  before  him as 
befits  his position  as the king ’s brother,  it was he who insisted  
on prostrating  himself to us. Nor was he satisfied  with 
prostrating  just once, Danasungbo  ensured  that he prostrated  
himself  to every  man in our company.
1 called  in the palace  thrice  during  the coronation  of Triple ­
foolishness,  almost  turned  myself  into a regular  visitor  in the 
place because  of the warm attitude  of the mother  of the king 
towards  me; she treated me with great respect on every 
occasion  when  we met. No matter  how unwise  a woman  might 
be, she is bound  to be affectionate  to her own son and being  
affectionate  to one’s own son also necessitates  an extension  of 
the same  hand  of liking  to his friends.
It took a while after this new king ascended  his throne  
before  he began  to attend  the court. One day when I came to 
look him up as usual, he asked me to come with him to the 
court  so as to observe  how the sessions  were held in the town ’s 
court. The king boasted  that we must ride to the court on 
horseback,  for he had just purchased  two live horses  which  he 
had not yet ridden  at all. And so did he propose  to lend one to 
me while he would ride on the second  for the occasion.  We 
agreed  on a date.
When  the appointed  day arrived,  I dressed  up and headed  
for the palace,  but there  I was awaited  by a surprise.  When  the 
king was ready  and ordered  that his horses  be brought  out, I 
found  to my great surprise  that, instead  of horses  it was cows  
with huge antlers  which  sauntered  out. And when the animals  
confronted  us, I wailed  out to the king in this manner,  ‘Ah, king 
of Edidare,  is it cows which you call horses! ’. But the king 
simply  replied  me saying  those were the things which  passed  
for horses  in the place.
73






Quickly,  he chased  one of the cows  and climbed  him on the bac'
74






Quickly,  he chased  one of the cows and climbed  him on the 
back, but the animal  turned  neck and tossed  the king who fell 
flat to the ground  on his back. And as the animal  planned  to 
fork the king to the ground  with its horns,  I hit it with a stick 
and it desisted.  I took this as a lesson  on my own part and did 
not bother  to ride the cow, I chose  instead  to trek to the court  
on my feet. Even so the king had scarcely  scrambled  to his feet 
when  he reached  out for his cow, re-took  his place  on its back  
and began  to gallop  on.
Finally  when we arrived  in the court, what we met was a 
vociferous  crowd  of people;  some shouted,  others  chased  one 
another  all over the place,  and when the king and I took our 
entrance,  none of them behaved  as though  he noticed  us; they 
all persisted  in their incessant  clamouring.  But the king rose on 
his feet and bellowed,  asked  them to Sing their pledge  of Faith  
in Food. Instantly  quiet took over. Those  people  were indeed  
slaves  to food. I had never  heard  this pledge  myself  before  this 
time, I shall recite it for you and you shall in turn recite  after  
me:
T believe  in food, he is governor  of the body. Good food 
causes  the body  to shine,  gives  you a stout  bone  and makes  your 
blood  flow freely  in your veins.  Bad food brings  disease  in your 
feet, indecent  meals lead bodies  to a premature  old age — 
cheeks  puff out pointlessly,  eyes become  sunken,  the pillars  of 
the nostrils  are weakened  in their base. Also,  your legs become  
as broomsticks,  the flesh of the arms turn flabby,  your front  
swells  forwards,  not commensurate  with the rest of your body  
and your buttocks  are flat. Bad food brings  you a wrinkled  face 
and you become  as a whole  crowd  of wizened  flesh.  I am also of 
the belief  that in the community  of grubs,  pounded  yam must  
emerge  as chairperson  and amala  as his deputy.  Rice comes  
next in the third place.  Corn-mealie  is of the gentle  class,  he is 
leader of meals. Even so, soup is the policeperson,  for he 
polices  the progress  of morsels.  When  pounded  yam threw  a 
feast, okra was his bride, and when amala  took a woman  for 
himself,  his choice was ewedu.  Vegetables  was wife to the






wrapped  morsel; moinmoin,  oh, moinmoin  the beloved,  
betrothed  of the eorn-pap.  And behold,  the tried plantain  lags 
not behind,  he is noble in his own right. The roast yam is never j 
squat  in size, he is himself  the crown-head  of hamlets.  Paw-paw  
is war general,  the atorney  is bananas.  On the very day gari 
made a large feast, he summoned  fried fishes, summoned  
meat, roast meat and called on shrimps.  He did not fail to 
accord  okra his dues; it was sheer  humility  which  drove  him to 
the door-step  of ewedu.
‘Excessive  eating is not good, moderacy  is the best. 
Commander  is peppers,  onions  belong  among  the nobility  and 
handsomeness  is the tomato  but the wealthiest  of all is the 
melon  seed. To crown  all of these,  a decent  meal,  decent  water  
and pure air gives  benefit  to your body ’.
This was how the people  of Edidare  recited  their pledge  to 
food. They were well ordered  white they chanted  those lines 
but disorder  resumed  the very moment  they paused  from the 
chanting.  These  people  gave greater  respect  to food than they 
gave their king. And I shall wish you all to note that all their  
revelations  on the nature of food are very accurate.  Which  
teaches  us that whatever  a man craves deep down to his 
stomach,  he will be very knowledgeable  about.  The citizens  of 
Edidare  were rotten  in their ways but were very knowledgeable  
on the subject  of food.
Few cases were in court on this day but even then the two 
that were brought  before  the king were ones in which  the king 
himself  was represented  as the accused.  A certain man 
snatched  three of the king ’s wives ahd these women  were  
brought  forward  before  the king to state their case. But rather j 
than plunge  into the substance  of their case, the women  simply i 
commenced  a most unsparing  rain of abuse  on the crown,  even j 
while it was the king himself  who was expected  to adjudge  the , 
case. Filled with fiabbergasts  was I when the king began to j 
plead  with the women  to return  to him, at which  point the man 
who took the wives  stepped  forward  and rained  his own tirade  
76






of imprecations  on the king, assuring  the king that he had seen 
the last of the women.  The fellow  boasted  that all that now 
remained  was for the king  to ask a refund  of his bride-price  which  
he paid on the women  and he was all prepared  to refund  those  
there  and then. Perceiving  that the bargain  was lost on him, the 
king ordered  the man to pay a refund  of one penny  on each one 
of the women  he had taken and go his way — so did I learn,  
open-mouthedly,  that a whole  woman ’s bride-  price  was no more  
than one penny  in the town of Edidare.
In the petition  which  came  next, the king was once again  the 
defendant.  A man came forward  and petitioned  that the king ’s 
dead father. Double-foolishness  that is, owed him a certain  
amount  of ihoney;  when the matter  was closely  investigated  it 
was found  that the former  king ’s debt which  he owed  this man 
amounted  to four pence.  The petitioner  declared  hence  that he 
must have his money  paid him on that very spot, else he would  
ask for the court ’s summons  against  the crown.  Even as His 
Majesty  observed  that there was no way to wriggle  out of this, 
he handed  the refund  he had just collected  over his wives  to the 
man, that being three pence,  but it still left another  penny  to 
pay before  he could be freed from the hands  of the citizen.  It 
was right before  my full glare like this that the king set about  
looking  for an extra penny with which to pay his father ’s 
creditor,  and no one present  was willing to bail him out. 
Outraged  by what he considered  to be a prank  from the king,  
the man went over to the court ’s clerk and demanded  the 
required  papers  with which to institute  an action against  the 
king, and the clerk complied  and gave him the papers On 
receiving  the court ’s summons  from the hand of this man, the 
king spread  out flat on the floor of the court and began to 
plead.  Whereupon  the man warned  that the king mus: find the 
rest of the money  within  three  days or expose  himself  to the risk 
of the prison.  These  were the things  which  my eyes encountered  
in the town of Edidare  where  citizens  prosecuted  their king for 
failing  to pay a debt  of one penny.  1 left the king ’s court  thereafter
77






and returned  to our lodging  where  1 related  these  things  to my 
friends.
But after this event, the conduct  of His Highness,  King  
Triple-foolishness  toward  me began  to astonish  me in no small  
measure.  Anyone  who observed  how closely  we appeared  to 
relate  to each other  and interacted  in public  would  have begun  
to imagine  that we were true friends,  but no, the fact was the 
contrary.  Triple-foolishness  gave little regard to my person.  
And this really ought not have bothered  me since there are 
countless  of such men walking  on the surface  of the earth  today  
who mask their faces behind different  names but whose  
behaviours  are quite identical  with that of Triple-foolishness.  
These  are the very men of woes, they have sinned  against  the 
Almighty  God and have sinned against  humanity;  if a man 
humbles  himself  before  them,  rather  than exalt him to the place  
of honour  as was commanded  by the Son of the Lord in the 
days of old, these evil-headed  persons  would  press their toes 
over his head and offer him discourtesy  upon discourtesy.  Men 
of this sort can never find their space in the company  of 
progressive  heads,  theirs  shall be in the hub of retrogress  for 
ever and ever more.
What did 1 see next? Triple-foolishness  had promulgated  
some laws which revealed  clearly  that he had set me and my 
companions  up ai his targets.  The new set of enactments  which  
he sent forth  to his citizenry  read like this;
‘Commandment  First. Anyone  who beholds  Irinkerindo  
anywhere,  within  or outside  this territory  must hit him with a 
stick on the back of his neck. Anyone  who beholds  this man 
and fails to deal him a blow of the club, be he man or woman,  
shall be liable  to a fine of five pence ’.
I want you all to observe  the extent  of the hatred;  a king  who 
could  not himself  raise a single  penny  in court now decrees  that 
the man who fails to club me should  pay a fine of five pence,  the 
cost of five full-blooded  women  in the town of Edidare!
The two laws which  he passed  had something  to do with us.
78






This is the second:
‘Any  stranger  who finds himself  in the town of Edidare  must  
not eat his own food, he shall eat directly  from the people  of 
Edidare;  he must not drink any other  water  except  that which  
the citizens  of this town drink, he shall not live in a house  
different  from that which the people  live in. Anyone  caught  
contravening  this law shall be liable to a term of ten minutes  
imprisonment ’.
When these legislations  were released  to the public we 
observed  inscribed  on the bottom  of the document  these  words,  
‘I king who is king over all kings, ruler of Edidare,  whom  
Ilaburu  bore to Double-foolishness,  father of Danasungbo,  
hereby  endorse  these laws with my arms and my feet, my eyes 
and my nose, my head and my neck, my in and my out, the tip 
of my tongue  and the nooks  and corners  of my nostrils,  on this 
ninth day of the sixth month.  Nineteen  Hundred  and Fifty-two  
years  after the death  of our Lord ’.
The long and short of this matter,  which  I want you all to 
know is that we had to fight the people  of Edidare  over this 
obnoxious  law. I shall not go into the details  of the encounter  
today  because  of the flight  of time. But the summary  of it is that 
we emerged  victorious  in the end and they bowed to us, 
declared  that they released  themselves  to us.
We met with the chiefs  of the town who agreed  to put their  
new resolution  on paper  that the town  had surrendered  itself  to 
us entirely.  Hence  we purchased  hoes, cutlasses  and axes in 
large numbers  and distributed  them  to the people  of the town; 
they cleared  bushes  within the town and paved highways  all 
through  the land. We insisted  on their constructing  latrines  
also, uprooted  the large trees of the metropolis  which  gave the 
city the appearance  of a dense  forest.  Nor did we spare their  
streams  which  we had them purify  and clear up. We ordered  
for sponges  and toilet  soap in great  abundance  and encouraged  
the citizens  to bath with them, backing  that act up with a law 
that each man must come  forward  for inspection  every  time he
79






took his bath. Even so and in this manner,  did we transform  the 
place.
It is natural for you to begin to wonder on what fate befell 
their king, whether  we removed  him or placed someone  else in 
his place. We did not replace  their crown-head,  no, instead  we 
appointed  a Governor  over the territory, a steadfast fellow 
from our ranks whose name is Rock of Hereafter.  He was from 
the same neighbourhood  as Kumodiran  back home. Into his 
hands did we commit the town and we set our heads back again 
on the road leading to the Forest of One Thousand  and 
Four Hundred  Deities. We looked forward to the time of our 
return with satisfaction  that the town would have embraced  
much civilization,  for Rock of Hereafter  was a hardy man who 
would not condone any nonsense.  The town, in our opinion 
required  such a man for it to trudge forward.  One fellow from 
among us even put forward an idea that the Governor  should 
wed Ilaburu, the widow of the late king, but he declined;  we 
entreated  him on this but he rejected  it flat saying she did not 
fascinate  him in any way. The Governor  opined  that the woman 
still reeked a little, that she compassed  much filth that would 
require  some time to clear.
'J’b Io Sgts! 'Jiij Wj
.V'
-■ 1’018
80






f MELANCHOLY  AND PRIDE  WITH  
PRECIOUS  TONGUE,
HIS WIFE
We departed  from the town of Edidare  after we had dwelt  
in it for three full months  and re-entered  into the path of our 
voyage.  It should  not amaze  you that we paused  for so long a 
time from the object  of our mission  without  heading  fast for our 
destination,  our king back home had himself  entreated  us to 
spend  as much time as we wished  in any place, insofar  as we 
deemed  it to be beneficial  to our ultimate  goal.
Our journey  was all pleasures  after we emerged  from that 
town and we witnessed  no obstruction  whatsoever  until we 
came into a certain  jungle  known  as Wilderness  of the Father  
Divinity.  It was from the very moment  when we approached  
this forest that we resumed  our association  with ghommids.  
Presently,  I shall acquaint  you with one unique experience  
which  occurred  in the heart of this forest  in a particular  night.  
This was how it happened:
I had myself  gone to sleep  during  this night when  my friends  
came and stirred  me awake.  On waking  up, I observed  that all 
about was pitch dark, so I asked what was amiss but my 
companions  waved  me to be silent and listen to certain  sounds  
coming  out of the interior  of the forest,  unearthly  sounds,  more  
resembling  the voices  of a multitude  of people  in a market.  
And true enough,  when I fastened  my ears to the direction  in 
which  they pointed,  I began  to hear them  distinctly  — voices  of 
beasts from the woods and the voices of snakes of the 
wilderness,  voices  of assorted  trees and palmfronds,  the voices  
of leaves and creepers,  precious  metallic  objects from the 
interior  of the earth also, fishes  of the deep waters  and insects  
of the earth surface  cried in one unitary  voice: ‘Depart!  Be 
departed!  Take yourself  off! Take  yourself  out! out! outside,  at 
once! You will not dwell here! You will not dwell amongst  us 
for we share nothing  in common  with you! We must have none
81






of you! We must have none of you, Pride! You are the blemish 
of the world, Pride, a deep taint to the earth you are! Where  is 
the regress of the earth but in you! Do not bring your evil 
consequences  upon us! Go your way now! Go your own way we 
beseech you! We enjoin you this day to - Go-o-o-o-o.  
Go-o-o-o-o!  Go-o-o-o-o!  Go-o-o-o-o!  Go-o-o-o-o!  Go-o-o-o-o!
O-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-h! ’.
These were the things which we heard echoing  out from the 
forest in the night but I steeled myself against fear, for even 
from the day when I assumed  leadership  over this group was I 
resolved never to allow fright a chance inside me. This was 
indeed  because  if a leader becomes  too quickly  prone to fright, 
he would scarcely be able to take proper charge over his 
followers  in times of strife, if a head rises to his feet to flee, the 
man of the rear must also rise in flight with all his might.
I rose and stared straight in the direction  of the noise, and 
after a while, I began to detect a distant flashlight, quite 
identical to sunlight in its intensity, appearing  to cover a 
particular enclosure in the darkness. I found on close 
observation  that this enclosure  had neither walls nor any other 
demarcations  of its own, a square arena, bordered  on all tour 
edges by the limits of the light; it was a space no bigger than 
twelve feet in length and in breadth.  Every other place outside 
this was impenetrable  darkness.  Sitting in this square enclosure  
were two spirits. One was male and the other was female.  On the 
head of the man was a cap which glittered from sparks of 
diamonds  and was of the shape of a crown. His gown was the 
loose-sleeved  agbada and hanging on it were several chips of 
white sequins which served it as adornment.  These rich orna­
ments gave his entire body an incessant  glow as when a brilliant 
blacksmith  constructs  assorted  kinds of cornucopia  for a dig­
nified lady. When he stood up and tried to walk, his dress gave 
some sounds,  much a resemblance  of rattling  palm-wine  gourds 
hanging  down the body of a tapster.
His companion  was for her own part a good-looking  woman 
and was as richly draped; she was clothed in the dress of rar
82






beads. She was not particularly  different  from other women I 
have known in the world except for her uncommonly  elongated  
tongue  which projected  out of her mouth and hung downwards  
to her navel. Even as these spirits rose and tried to come closer 
to us, the light also rose with them. And when I observed  how 
directly  they seemed  to make our bodies their target,.!  bellowed 
out to them thus, ‘Do you come to us accompanied  by peace or 
by clubs! ’ And the man replied,  ‘we are for peace’.
But when they had drawn nearer and were at close quarters 
from us, I discovered  that, much as these two were dressed in 
the garbs of wealth, they were also soaked wet by tears from a 
prolonged  duration  of weeping.  It was this which made me to 
ask them for a second  time like this, ‘what is the cause of your 
tragedies,  you who are so richly dressed? ’ upon which the man 
raised up his voice once again and began to bare his mind to us 
in the words that follow:
‘My name is Melancholy  and Pride, son of Light and 
Darkness,  I dwell on the borders  of heaven  and earth. Light is my 
father but my mother  is Darkness.  I am a complete  resemblance  
of my mother and in no tiny speck do I resemble 
my father. As the tale goes, my mother  was the slave and it was 
my father who captured  her in battle when the inhabitants  of 
heaven  were locked  in battle with Satan the king of hell. This was 
the period when the devil assembled  his armies and plotted a 
warfare  against the Almighty  God. My own father fought in the 
ranks of the Lord but my mother  was a leading  figure in the court 
of Lucifer,  her own  job being  to cook food for the soldiers  fighting 
on the side of hell. And it was indeed a fierce battle but God 
emerged  victorious  in the end. For this reason was the devil 
banished  into hell and has since been barred  from straying  onto 
the hallowed  grounds of heaven even to this day. I married a 
certain maiden from the city of my mother on my twenty-fifth  
birthday  — the woman  is this who stands next to me — her own 
name being Precious  Tongue, and she is the first child which 
Contagion  delivered  to Death in the city of my mother.
83






‘On our wedding  day, wonders  occurred  on the borders  of 
heaven  and earth, for this was the same day when my father  
made  me a gift of the Garment  of Light,  saying, wherever  you 
may go from this day child,  be it in daytime  or night,  you shall  
not walk in darkness  for ever and ever more ’.
On hearing  these words, all the spirits present  chorussed  
‘amen! ’ After him came my mother  who also forwarded  an 
offering  — a very spacious  garment,  this same garment  which  
you see on me this minute.  A distinct  garment  it is which  she 
had retrieved  from the bottom  of Satan ’s wardrope,  known  all 
through  heaven  as the Garb of Pride.  And there is much truth  
in this name for I have come to realise  it myself,  from that 
moment  when  this garment  touched  my skin that I had seen the 
last of bliss, yet the case with the dress was such that once  
admitted  to a body, it cannot  be removed  any longer  except  
through  the assistance  of a child of the world.  From this day 
also was I turned,  through  the influence  of this garment,  into a 
complete  man of pride;  I began  to swell from sheer  conceit  and 
became  an extremely  spiteful  individual.  All other men became  
much reduced  in my estimation,  so much that I persisted  in 
pouring  scorn over the whole  lot of them and dared  anyone  to 
reprimand  me. My strutting  became  the strutting  of pride itself  
and words which 1 released  through  my lips were a pure 
suggestion  of pride, including  my conduct  also. Each day 
passing,  the bog-trolls  of heaven  embarked  on schemes  which  I 
adjudged  to be superior  to mine and this has filled me with 
detestation  to the point of madness,  it brought  me great  
unhappiness.  Whenever  I espy them on the road towards  
progress  I am smitten  by great anger;  even so do 1 weep all 
about  every  day of my existence.
‘Now about iny wife: She is not particularly  different  from  
me — the influential  man and the wealthy  are peers,  the untidy  
man and the lunatic  are equals,  as the covetous  fellow  and the 
leader of bandits  are comrades.  On the day of our wedding,  
Contagion  who is mother  to my wife obtained  spells from the 






hands  of the devil  and prolonged  her tongue  — this very tongue  
which  you see hanging  loose  from her mouth.  There  is no such 
being  on this earth  or in heaven  to surpass  this woman  of mine  
in gossiping,  for the tongue  has the ability to extricate  itself  
from  my wife and gossip  on its own even  without  her asking  it; it- 
has also the capacity  for hearing  things and reporting  back  
afterwards  like a normal human being. Actually  goes to 
eavesdrop  wherever  an inauspicious  word was being passed  
about either  of the two of us: a friend  who recounts  only the. 
negative  aspect  of what is spoken  about  a man in his absence,  a 
wife who never relates  back to her man what word of praise  
was spoken  behind  his back except  those of abuse,  people  of 
this sort are the hardened  brewers  of misunderstanding  
amongst men, they have turned themselves  into the 
contamination  of the earth.  It is in this position  that this tongue  
stands  with my wife, the tongue  which  was her wedding  present  
from  Contagion  who is the wife of Death.
‘The Creator  has blessed  us with offsprings,  one son and one 
daughter.  The name of the male who is elder is Downfall  but 
Destruction  is the name of his sister. The two of them are 
grown-ups  today and are married.  A.s a matter  of fact, the 
woman  whom  Downfall  should  have married  was Itijupare  who 
is daughter  to one individual  who bears  the same  name  as me in 
hell, that is, her father ’s name is also Melancholy  and Pride.  
We had actually  gone to do the formal  asking  before  we found  
out that the lady ’s mother  is our relative;  her own mother  and 
Precious  Tongue  were born in the same house.  But at the end 
of the day. Downfall  took a certain  woman  whose name is 
Melancholy  of the Outside  as his wife. Even this was also a 
relation  of ours but a very distant  relation,  for indeed  her father  
was Sickness-leans-back  who was himself  the son of Ignorance  
who is related to my mother,  Darkness.  The husband  of 
Destruction  is Hardened  Thief  which  a certain  woman  whose 
name  is Shame-within  delivered  to Chaos.
‘In conclusion,  I beseech  you son of man, I beseech  you most
85






86B 
rdesperately  to come over to me now and rid me of the Garb of 
Pride, for it has been the cause of much melancholy  for me. 
It has also barred the Lord from extending  his favours to me, 
for the man in whom God has lost interest certainly comes 
before imminent  bedevilment.  Do this favour for me son of 
man, do not fail to separate  me this day form the Garb ot Pride .
Even so did the man come to the end of his discourse.  When 
he had paused, I turned towards the skies and dovetailed  my 
hands before the Lord, prayed  that He should not take of^nce 
with me for the task that is set before me, but that He should 
instead record it as one of my significant  deeds upon earth. So 
praying,  I called on the man to step forward  and he complied 1 
examined  the garment  and found that it had glued most firmly 
to the hairs of his skin, hence I called on my friends and asked 
their help. They all fetched  blades from their luggages  and with 
Melancholy  and Pride stretched  on the floor, began to cut off 
the evil dress from his body.
After we had completed  this task, the spirit bellowed  for joy 
but there still remained  this prolonged  tongue of his wife. Even 
as I stood pondering  this, a certain  jot of liquid dropped  from 
the torn garment  of Melancholy  and Pride; I touched  it with my 
finger discovered  that it had the texture of condensed  honey 
and acting on instinct, applied it to the tongue of the woman. 
No sooner was this tongue affected  by this liquid than it began 
to contract and I had scarcely shifted from the spot when it 
retracted  almost to the size of the testicle of the bell. A brand 
new tongue resurfacing  in its place, that being the size of a 
normal  tongue.Even so did we perform  this significant  deed for Melancholy  
and Pride, the son of Light and Darkness,  who lives on the 
borders  of heaven  and earth, and his wife Precious  Tongue  who 
is mother of Downfall and Destruction,  the daughter ol 
Contagion  and Death, mother in-law to Melancholy  of the 
Outside.When we had indeed come to the close of this event, a great 
occurred.  The ground  began to tremble  and clouds 






thundered,  loud wails ran through the forest and palm trees 
shouted out unto us in this manner, ‘we thank you, we are 
thankful  to you, we are much beholden  to you, you will prosper, 
your homes will yield happiness,  your paths will prosper  well, 
we thank you, we thank you, etc. etc.’
All of these occurred  in the middle of the night and when 
these spirits had expressed  their gratitude  to us, they went on 
their own way. We had a brief nap after this before dawn finally 
came knocking.  It was twelve noon of this following  day before 
we re-encountered  another  worthwhile  spectacle.
WE SET OUR  EYES  ON HELL
We were hardly  arrived  in a tranquil  region where the leaves 
of the bushes were thickly sprouted  and the foliage of the trees 
was dark and shimmering  when a unique spirit emerged  before 
us in the distance.  One glimpse of him and we began to fight 
hard to suppress  the urge to call out to him and hail him as 
Kabiyesi,  this was because  he was fully decked  in the outfit of a 
king. We were probably  prone to such complacency  because 
we had indeed  forgotten  that we were still in the Wilderness  of 
the Father Divinity.  His hat carried  the sparkles  of a crown, his 
sandals were woven in the fashion of the powerful,  and the 
jabots on his tops were a complete resemblance  of kingly 
ornaments,  such as were obtained from the very hands of 
Oduduwa  at the start of times. He was accompanied  by several 
elves and I spotted among the company  a singular type who 
held a wooden  box high up on his head. We hunters  directed  our 
chests  to the floor to salute this personality,  after which  he himself 
raised his voice to speak out to us thus,
‘Where are you heading  to, you sons of human  beings? ’ And 
I replied  him at once by saying,
‘Kabiyesi,  the sandals will long endure on your feet. Our 
destination  is the Mount of Thought  which is in the forest of a 
Thousand  and Four Hundred Deities, our purpose to fetch 
sufficient  knowledge  for our nation, that understanding  may 
sprout roots inside it. Even so, you will forgive our






forwardness,  for it is curiosity that prompts us thus — we 
implore  you to reveal who in particular  your highness  is, and we 
urge you not to fail also to exert yourself  in whatever  form that 
you may deem fit on our account ’.
When he had heard these words from me, he began to 
address  us in the words that follow:
‘I am Endurance,  the spirit whose home is in the vaults of 
heaven.  This is the name which God almighty  allotted  unto me, 
for I am the most enduring  of all beings. Much goodness  have 
befallen me through persevering.  Any creature,  be he of the 
earth or the heavens,  who is lacking  in endurance  is clearly  one 
of little consequence.  When once a most bestial ghommid  
whose residence  is in the heart of heaven took an offence 
towards his own son and no man proved equal to the task of 
settling  the misunderstanding,  it was I who put it all to an end; 
The name of this evil being is Leopard-Anger  who is maternal 
relation to Melancholy  and Pride. Leopard-anger  boasts the 
largest zest for fury of all creatures,  whether of the waters or 
beneath the soil, in the skies or among those that tread the 
warmth  of sands. At the outbreak  of this quarrel,  the bog-trolls  
of heaven  pleaded  with him but he turned  deaf ears to them. His 
verdict  was that the offending  son must be deported  to the earth 
so that he might have his share of the numerous  sorrows  which 
the sons of men bear about all their lives. This matter  came to my 
hearing  and I braced myself  up and directed  myself  towards  the 
home of Leopard-Anger  with a mind of persuading  him off the 
line of action,  but he turned me back with clubs. The day follow­
ing, 1 prepared  and headed  back to Leopard-Anger ’s, but he gave 
no allowance  for speeches;  he seized his gun and sent blazes in 
my direction,  those missing me by a few inches. Even so, I still 
went back there on the third day. 1 was scarcely  emerged  in the 
vicinity  when he took hold of cusses and rained them on me And 
as if those were not sufficient,  he clutched at his cutlass and 
chased me right into my own doorstep.  It will surely baffle you 
that I still sent my head in search of disaster  on the fourth day. 
88






before  which he has invoked  Satan’s bull-dog  with spells  from the 
darkest  bowels of earth. This animal he summoned  for the pur­
pose of slaughtering  me for food if I dared to show  up once again, 
and it was more to good-luck  that the arms of the beast failed to 
reach me. But did I fail to repeat my feat on the fifth day? On 
this particular occasion, he had anticipated  my coming as 
before and had lined every evil-natured being whose 
temperaments  were similar to his own by the gates, each of 
them carrying  a cudgel with a hundred  spikes. And when I had 
come within some distance of the house and had spied the 
battery of armed guards, I made no move to go closer but 
simply  wailed my piteous sermons  to him on the need to spare 
his son. That done, I took myself  back to my own house to await 
the seventh  tiay. Dawn was hardly arrived  when I plunged  once 
again unto the road leading to Leopard-Anger ’s residence.  I 
was not to know that he had taken new precautions  against my 
next nuisance  and had rigged a trap*  in my route, hoping that I 
should walk directly into it. But when I appeared in the 
distance,  his anger was so roused that he himself  leapt on the 
pathway  to confront  me, forgetting  that it was the very location 
of his own trap which he chose to charge  upon. Even so did the 
snare snap shut on his limbs, and it occurred  to me from that 
moment that my crime had swelled above banks: I fled from 
bedevilment  and collapsed into chaos. My next act was to 
summon  neighbouring  spirits to help to free Leopard-Anger  
from the ensnarement.  And seeing that they had departed 
towards  the spot of his imprisonment,  I sped away with all my 
might.
‘After regaining his liberty, he devoted himself fully to 
seeking me all over, and even offered to reward anyone who 
would give useful information  on how best to capture me. He 
despatched  spies to the earth and the irmer recesses  of hell and 
also sent words to the plain of heaven but he failed to trace 
me. I hid myself away from light knowing  that I had committed  
the worst of crimes, I stared a lion in the face and hissed upon 
the tortoise,  I pressed  my toes on a cobra’s tail and dragged  a
89






woman  along  the streets  on a day when Oro ruled  the outside.  
Understanding  the true enormity  of my misdeed,  I tucked  
myself  in the tunnels  and kept my silence  there  for sixty days.
‘When  sixty days elapsed,  1 rose onto land and when  I found  
that I was actually  out, where  was to be my first port of call 
besides  the home of the evil-headed  ghommid?  This provided  
him the awaited  opportunity  to capture  me since he merely  
stretched  an arm and grabbed  me after a brief pursuit.  He 
secured  me with thick fibres and hung me, head-down,  on an 
enormous  tree nearby.  I swayed  from this position  while he 
dragged  out a whole  load of supple  lashes  which  he then began  
to extract one after another  and flogged  me until he had 
thrashed  the breath  out of me. So judicious  was the thrashing  
that I came face to face with death. When  all the whips had 
been used up, he satisfied  himself  that I was as good as dead  
and so, brought  me down,  after which  he withdrew  towards  his 
backyards  gathering  faggots  with which to cremate  my body.  
But before  his return,  wind had blown  over me so much that I 
had been revived somewhat,  I scrambled  to my feet and 
staggered  away.  Back  home,  I treated  the weals  and by the next 
day-break  I had regained  some energy  which  I still went forth  
to expend  on another  trip to the home of Leopard-Anger.  
Worthy  companions,  ihis was the day when the unexpected  
occurred.  Even before-1  had come within  a clear view of the 
house.  Leopard-Anger  liad himself  taken seat by the gateway 
to welcome  me. It was not his very presence  which  gave me the 
open-mouth  as the gestures  which he communicated  to me. I 
wiped  my face to make sure: it was Leopard-Anger  all right  
and he was hailing  me and beckoning  excitedly  as I approached  
him! I stepped  through  his doors  with dread  but I was soon to 
realise  that my moment  of recompense  had arrived,  the seeds  
of enduring  had germinated,  1 had triumphed  at battle, had 
climbed  the hill to the roof, had bagged  success  in examination,  
I had humbled  Leopard-Anger,  his granite  eyes had softened  
and I called on his son to step inside and bow in gentleness  
before  his father.  Even  so did I bring  the matter  to rest.
90






‘I had no idea that all these my deeds were apparent  to the 
eyes of the Lord, and when I embarked  on my return journey 
home a voice rumbled through the skies and spoke unto me 
saying - ‘Even as you have performed  these deeds you shall 
discard your old name and hence be called by Endurance,  for 
your feat has marked you aside in the midst of beings ’. And 
even from that moment  has comfort taken residence  with me. 
However,  my heart rejoices to see the lot of you today, 1 am 
over-joyed  truly. And I implore you to come with me so that 
you might see my home,everyone  of you’.
When I observed that he had retired from speaking, I 
implored him to grant us a brief moment to discuss the 
proposition  afnongst ourselves.  He gave his consent, and we 
stepped aside to think it over. A clear majority  of the hunters 
agreed that we seize the opportunity  at hand to set eyes on the 
home of the ghommid.  None of them had bCheld the interior  of 
a ghommid ’s home before, especially  when this particular  
one seemed  a unique  personality  in the community  of spirits.
I broke the news of our resolution  to him and he was truly 
overtaken  with bliss; he bade us fall behind him at once. We 
had trekked  on awhile before he suddenly  turned upon the soil 
and addressed  him thus: ‘Soil open up for I wish to see my 
mother ’s home’. Even before he had completed  his speech, 
earth began to yawn and a giant ladder  which had its root in the 
bowels surfaced, whereupon  we multitudes,  with Endurance  
himself  at our head began to climb down into the belly of the 
soil. On reaching the very base of the earth, we discovered  
ourselves in a certain spacious palace, the magnificence  of 
which I greatly  fear defies description.  We were greatly  amazed 
to realise that this was the residence  of the man. He h;d us to 
the presence of his mother who warmed out unto us and 
welcomed  us with numerous  greetings.  She was a rotund figure 
with a glistening  skin. Her skin was clear and spotless except 
that her eyeballs were not exactly human in appearance,  they 
were as rounded  as the keg of wine. Those eyes rolled round in 
their sockets; she was a most terrifying figure. When she
91






smiled, a set of sparkling  teeth was revealed,  they were  
beautiful  altogether  and were  moderately  shaped.
Thereafter  we were taken round the house and bedrooms  
were allocated  to us. Endurance  suggested  that we split into 
groups  of fours, and he allotted  an enormous  bedchamber  to 
each  group.  The rooms  were all of identical  designs.
I am not too certain  that any other experience  1 have had 
since has matched  this one in sweetness,  1 truly merried  in the 
home of Endurance.  His residence  was the very home of 
marvels.  It was absolutely  needless  to turn to anyone  to make  
any request,  each man ’s requirement  fell on his lap the very 
moment  he did as much as whisper  it to the air. When a man 
muttered  the wish for yams  softly  to himself,  a steaming  bowl of 
rarc-breed  yams descended  in his front from the void. Nor 
were you served otherwise  in the case of rice and stew — 
deeply seasoned  chicken simmering  in flavourous  sauces  
Hooded  your front with the rice. 1 recall now a singular  
occasion  when 1 gave voice to the wish of palm-wine,  instantly  
an enormous  keg of frothed  wine placed  itself before  me and 
thereupon  1 reached  out and drained  it to my satisfaction.  We 
were never  denied  aught in the place.
On the evening  of the day of our arrival,  the spirit  came  to us 
and informed  us about a certain task, a most singular  
assignment  which he had just set before  himself  and which he 
proposed  to give us the benefit  of partaking  in its execution.  
We prayed  him to elaborate  on the nature  of the task at once  
and, impressed  by our zeal, he informed  us that he was about  to 
construct  a mansion  and it would be known  as The House  of 
the Exaltation  of Heaven.  This, he told us, was a project  which  
God Himself  had long desired  the citizens  of heaven  to embark  
upon but which had proven  too strenous  an exercise  for them.  
And so, he Endurance  had gone before the Lord and 
volunteered  to try his hand on it. A gesture  which delighted  
God to such extent that He gave His consent  and ordered  a 
piece of land to be made available  to him for the purpose.  It 
was the clearing  of bushes  on the land which  had to commence  
92






in the next morrow  and the clearing  of the same piece  of land 
was where he was asking our hands, to which we eagerly  
assured  him of our readiness  to offer  our assistance.
At break  the following  morning,  a box was pulled  out — the 
same  box which  1 had observed  on the head  of one of the spirits  
on his entourage.  This box was opened  and inside it were  
several  work-clothes  which  were then extracted  one by one and 
served  to everyone  of us, after which  we gripped  our matchets  
and turned  in the direction  of the bushland  which the Creator  
allocated  to Endurance,  for the construction  of The House  of 
the Exaltation  of Heaven.
We mowed  the shrubs and the creepers  to the ground  
instantly  and directed  our limbs back to the house.  But on our 
return  there  the following  morning  we found  that the stems  and 
stump  which  we had uprooted  had risen to their feet and the 
leaves  and spikes  which  had been cut had arisen  also and taken  
.their places  as before  on their plants.  This presented  no cause  
for distress,  we immediately  tauntened  our trousers  and picked  
up our cutlasses  for a re-cxecution  of the bastard  plants.  We 
aborted  the roots from their base and set about presenting  
embers  to the Iroko tree on the plot. We did not spare the 
fibrous roots of the walnut including  the various other  
recalcitrant  trees which we generously  baptised  with flames.  
We had excelled  in the enterprise  before  dusk and we returned  
home.
First thing  the next morning,  we turned  back to the site and 
were awaited  by yet another  wonderment.  The plucked  leaves  
of the shrubs had regained  their positions,  the over-turned  
weeds  had sprouted  new stems  and all our camp-fires  had died 
out. Matters  then stood  as they were on the first day.
Recognising  the determined  hand of futility,  we began to 
seek labourers  every  where,  actual  natives  of heaven  wlio would 
come  to our aid. Endurance  himself  had opined  that it was only 
valid citizens  of heaven  who should  prove equal to the task 
now. Hence  he himself  took to the roads  and began  to scout for 
labourers,  but they all evaded him. Failing in this again.
93






Endurance  resolved  to turn to his mother  for help:
‘My dear mother,  I have exerted  myself  as is fitting  yet I have 
•failed  to clear the bush on the land where  I intend  to construct  
this House of the Exaltation  of Heaven.  Most affectionate  
mother,  forgive  me for failing to inform  you of this project  
earlier,  it simply slipped  from my mind. I am asking  your 
counsel  on how to attract labourers  for this task of the 
Exaltation  of Heaven ’.
The mother  peered  at her son piteously,  her eyeballs  rolling  
round in their pits and issuing occasional  flashes which  
resembled  lightning.  She replied  her son thlis, ‘My son, do not 
embark  on that project  of the house of heaven ’s Exaltation.  
This is because  men who boast greater  energy  and know-how  
than you have tried but failure  became  their profit.  Even then,  
as for labourers,  thoicughly  seasoned  labourers  are not to be 
encountered  anywhere  here except in hell for that is their  
favourite  spot. And if perchance  you are still resolved  to seek 
them  even there  in hell, you must fetch  the oil of Bliss which  as 
you know  in the corner  of my room and rub it all over you lest 
you should  suffer affectations  from the lurid flames  of hell. If 
you decide  to ask your friends  to accompany  you — these sons 
of men — you must serve them all with the hats of Invisibility  
which are abundant  in a box which you will find at the 
vestibule.  These  they shall wear on their heads  for Satan  must  
not catch  sight of them.  Even so, despite  their invisibility,  they 
must also rub their skins in the oil of Bliss for immunity  from  
the haze of the flames.  But this very important  fact you must  
place at heart: when you reach hell — for I observe  that this 
matter  of the construction  is on the peak of your mind — you 
shall walk straight  on to Satan in his palace but will not 
prostrate  yourself  before  him or hail him as Kabiyesi.  This is 
because  no son of Light shall humble  himself  before  the devil,  
for on the very  day this regulation  comes  into violation,  that child  
of Light  loses  his heirship  and hence  comes  before  his own end. 
That  is all I have to say to you,  my most  beloved  child ’.
Endurance  began  to prepare  for the voyage  to hell almost  at 
94






once and he called on us to be equally prepared  against the 
following  day. He had asked us to accompany  him because he 
considered  it a worthwhile  adventure  that we ourselves  should 
experience  the sight of hell. In the following  morning,  he placed 
the oil of Bliss before us and we were all besmeared  in it, 
thereafter  he got us the caps of Invisibility  and we covered  our 
heads with them. The effect of this was that we were invisible  to 
everyone  except Endurance  himself. I wish you to remember  
that even as we were, the ground  on which we trod was the very 
ground of heaven, for Endurance ’ home has its location in 
heaven.  We set out for the highways  and began  to chase that road 
to hell.
Our first cause for amazement  was the sight of sacrifices  
lining the roadways  on the right and left. Many of the sacrifices  
were drenched  wet with the kernel oil. We beheld corn-mealie  
in pools of oil, cowrie shells, and occasionally  it was the 
abdomen  of fowls which was split wide and treated  with the red 
oil. We were made to understand  that these were the sacrifices  
which men offered Satan in the earth and which had been 
transfloated  onto the side-lawns  of the path leading  to his home 
in hell. As the devil blundered  past with his warriors,  he took 
time off to feast on the offerings  which were mostly served in 
potsherds.  When a day’s sacrifice  had been exhausted,  the sons 
of the world would hasten to provide  fresh supplies  against the 
next day. The regularity  of the supplies reduced the entire 
roadsides  to a heap of crushed skeletons  and the festering 
bodies  of half-eaten  carrions.
We were not long trekking after when we arrived in hell 
where the devil was king over them. It was with wide mouth 
that we discovered  the disorderliness  of the place. Everything 
there was inside-out  and this does not exempt  the roads which 
coiled out like long and wriggling  serpents.  Most puzzling  of all 
was the fact that well-being  and happiness  had no place in it: 
Satan and his warlords squeezed their faces all about in 
anguish.
The devil could not spy us but we saw him clearly at close
95






quarters.  Even as Endurance  stepped  through  the doorway  to 
his presence,  he gave a sudden start and when he began to 
conduct  Endurance  round his territory,  it was apparent  that his 
mind was not at peace. When a tree broke its waist, Satan 
almost jumped out of his trousers,  and when a man stumbled 
upon a pebble,  he was likewise  served  with unease—even so did 
the devil lead his existence  in pauseless  dread. Such was the 
experience  of his minions  and servants.  The matter was of such 
enormity that Endurance  felt compelled  to ask the precise 
cause of their tragedy  from Lucifer himself  and he replied like 
this, ‘we who are steeped  neck and feet inside evil understand  it 
that recompense  must arrive someday, only the hour and 
moment  we do not recognise. ’
Satan sat resplendent  in his throne; a complete  embodiment  
of terror. He nursed a horn in the centre of his head and the 
horn spurted fire. He bore two enormous  but unkempt  wings 
on his shoulders  and his fingernails  were long, they curved out 
as the claws of the bat. His teeth were red as blood and in fact 
it was blood which represented  saliva in his mouth. Each 
tooth in his mouth  was huge and three times the size of those of 
men. They were sharp as the head-scraping  razor. His feet 
were the exact rephcas of the ostrich ’s but even so, his 
deportments  were those of a king for the garment  on his back 
carried pure gold — except that the gold was rusty and 
encrusted  with much dirt.
Endurance  broached  the subject of his mission and Lucifer 
promised  to supply him with labourers.  He however  suggested  
that Endurance  should take a look round hell fir^t, hoping to 
entertain  him thereby  from its varied spectacles.
Lucifer  lifted himself  up from his throne  and sprinted  to the 
outside  in the company  of Endurance  and we dashed  after  them.  
After we had trekked  for a while he turned aside to Endurance  
and spoke thus, ‘Endurance,  our first port of call is a spot 
which we call Lucifer ’s Trap. The function of that is for 
reminding me of the need to do evil at all times, lest 
forgetfulness  should overtake  me.’
96






Lucifer lifted himself up from his throne in the company of 
Endurance  and we dashed after them.
97






We soon arrived  at Lucifer ’s Trap; he pointed  an object  
which  resembled  a bird ’s cage to Endurance.  Inside  this cage 
were  several  sparkling  coins  of gold but behind  the coins  was a 
coiled  cobra  which  raised  its head upwards  and darted  out its 
tongue.  Satan  pointed  at the object  and said, ‘when  I come  into 
Earth  and egg a man to pick his neighbour ’s money,  that which  
does not belong  to him, he will little realise  that he is plunging  
his finger  into a cobra ’s mouth. ’
After this, he led Endurance  forward  to a certain  house  in 
which  dwelled  a man and a woman.  Noticeable  on the floor  was 
a metal club and when Satan approached  the pair, he 
addressed  them saying,  ‘what are you waiting  for? proceed! ’ 
Whereupon  the man picked  the club and smashed  it on the 
woman ’s head.  That act completed,  Satan  turned  to Endurance  
and said, ‘observe  how the man broke  the head of the woman,  
and yet they are husband  and wife ’.
We stepped  forward  and approached  a house where we 
found two men on a ladder,  and the devil ordered  the one 
beneath  to pluck  the one on top to the ground  and he complied  
- reached  up a hand, pulled him down and climbed  to his 
position.  Even as the man usurped  the seat of his neighbour  an 
outsize  snake  leapt up from a corner  and seized  him, it twined 
round  him and devoured  him completely.  After the outgoing  
actions,  Satan spoke out thus unto Endurance:  ‘He sought  
blessings  through  a fraudulent  means  but waits not to enjoy  its 
pleasures ’.
We trekked  further  on and after a while we came upon  
another  house  in which  we found  an adorably  beautiful  woman  
and she was pitted  beside  a young  gentleman.  Satan  spoke  unto 
the woman  in this manner,  ‘perform  your act for us to see . 
Hearing  this the woman  beamed  on the man by her side and 
proceeded  to address  him thus: ‘There is no man living to 
match  you in beauty,  nor do I hold any other  person  in greater  
affection  than you. And this certainly  includes  those  who gave 
birth to me. Now draw closer yet at me and press your lips 
against  mine,  for I love you wonderously ’. Even so was the man 






addressed  and the unsuspecting  fellow  bent upon the lady and 
began to shower  passionate  kisses on her, whereupon  the 
woman  disallowed  him from detaching  himself.  Before  the man 
could guess what beset him, she began to egg him on 
towards  the brink  of a deep torrent  nearby,  and she tossed  him 
into it. This vision inspired  Lucifer  to make yet another  
comment:  ‘he had no idea that the affection  she has for him is 
one of the eyes. He released  himself  to her and permitted  her 
to drag him into a pool ’.
Next, we came toward  four men and the devil commanded  
them thus, ‘Reveal  your normal  behaviours  to us’. Those  said, 
three of the men leapt upon the fourth  and secured  his hands  
to the back.  After  this they plunged  their hands  into his pockets  
and extracted  various  valuables  from them,  pausing  after this to 
consider  what fresh  harm  was most befitting  to him. They  were  
not long at their deliberation  when  it occurred  to them that he 
was best slaughtered  afterall.  And soon afterwards,  after they 
had done  with murdering  their  fellow  man, some  muscular  men 
arrived  and arrested  them, leading  them away for hanging.  
Even  as they were certified  dead at their  different  ropes  and we 
were beginning  to heave  a sigh of relief,  we observed  the three  
executed  fellows  emerge  out of a certain  room. And as we 
began  to wonder  how dead men could resurrect  thus, a giant  
appeared  from a ruse and tossed  all three of them  into a basin  
of boiling  oils. At this stage, the devil grinned  and patted  
Endurance  on the back saying, ‘Take special  note of this, 
robbers  purge  the pockets  of neighboring  citizens  in the earth  
and are sent to the hangman  yet when  they report  to me here in 
hell, I have them fried in the palm kernel  oil’. Satan  bared  his 
teeth and guffawed  in a most sinister  manner  after giving  this 
speech.  That  was his first laughter  since  we encountered  him.
Myriad  other  spectacles  passed  by our eyes in hell but time 
is short and hence  they would  not be recounted  in full here. I 
shall merely  elaborate  on those that I consider  as the most  
important.
After  we had vacated  that very spot of the bandits,  Satan  led
99






Endurance  past a certain  terrain  which he described  as the 
Region  of Recompense.  This was the place where men who 
had siimed  on earth  were served  with the rewards  of their sins 
in the form  of agony.  The most piteous  fact was that regardless  
of the enormity  of their torment,  they would  never  experience  
death.  Our first stopping  here brought  us face to face with a 
man whose  agony  terrified  us greatly.  One of Lucifer ’s sei’vants  
sat by him and hammered  a peg into his eyes while the man 
yelled  incessantly.  This vision amazed  Endurance  in no small  
measure  but the devil called  on him to save his pity saying,  ‘you 
have no knowledge  of the callousness  of men. This prisoner  
before  you has in his lifetime  plucked  out the eyes of six men, 
he has also commanded  that the ten fingernails  of six other  
men be peeled,  not sparing  those  of their toes while  the eyes of 
the men were  wide open  to the fact. Is it not fitting  then that he 
should  himself  taste some  snack  of agony? ’.
Nearby  was another  fellow  in a steel pot which  was heated  
by flames  from  the base.  The result  of this was that the man was 
pauselessly  scotched  in the red-hot  pot and his skin peeled  off 
in rinds. This gentleman  let out abdominal  bellows  in his 
torment,  wailing  out in the words,  ‘this body aches, ah, this 
body  aches  me’, but no one gave him so much  as a glance.  His 
plight  swelled  our pity but Satan  merely  began  to look the other  
way and when  he observed  how affected  Endurance  was by the 
spectacle,  he explained  to Endurance  rather admonishingly  
that the man had during  his reins on earth sewn an animal ’s 
skin upon a living  human  body and had also led the same man 
to the lion to be feasted  upon.  He had nailed  another  fellow  in 
a coffin and buried  him alive. There  was yet another  person  
who was tied with ropes  by the two feet and pulled  in opposite  
directions  by Lucifer ’s employees,  he was then helped  to the 
lurid flames  of hell whose  haze glowed  in every  direction.  This 
man wailed  but they would  not let him go and yet he could  not 
die. We beheld  others  whose  arms had been knocked  off, and 
they bore the stumps spurting  blood as they wandered  
everywhere.
100






B Even  so we came to understand  that not all dwellers  of hell 
f suffered  these plights.  Those  who suffered  in this manner  were  
i mostly  those men who have occupied  seats of authority  in the 
s world  and employed  their positions  for dispensing  agonies  to 
i their fellow  men, agonies  which  were  similar  to the types  I have 
? just related  to you. I recall now how I caught  sight of a man 
t who sat atone,  all by himself  weeping  without  anybody  coming  
near to his region.  His case caused  Satan to elaborate  unto 
Endurance  in this manner;  ‘A complete  man of wealth  was this 
in his lifetime  but he refused  goodness  to other men with his 
resources.  He barred  people from himself,  keeping  a wide
i distance  from everyone.  He is dead now and has been  
i delivered  to my hands.  All he craves  presently  is an occasion  to 
share a little conversation  with someone  but that benefit  is 
denied  him. This year marks  his two hundred  and fiftieth  here 
and he has not uttered  a word  to anybody  since  his death ’.
Myriad  beings  lived on the Road of Recompense,  serving  
their  varied  forms  of punishment.  There  was the father  who cut 
his own son down with a rifle, the woman  who poisoned  
someone  else ’ child, the man who flogged  his elder brother  to 
death - how many  shall we recount  of the hundred  and eleven  
teeth  of Adepele?  Ah, transgressions  are truly  numerous  on the 
earth! Anyone  who wishes to understand  the truth of the 
numerals  should  himself  visit hell and see for himself.  Crimes  
which defy description  are replete  in the hands of men. The 
devil himself  confided  to Endurance  that he personally  derived  
no pleasure  from ill-will and that scarcely  was he able to 
accomplish  his evil missions  without  the man whom  he tempts  
giving  his consent.  So affected  was Lucifer  by this subject  that 
i he burst  out to further  express  his discomfitures:
‘Ah Endurance,  I will never  know  bliss! It is not that I myself  
get the kicks from evil, I would  have discarded  it long ago in 
fact except  that I find that to be impossible  now. It was from  
the start that I indulged  myself  with practicing  evil till this day 
when  it clothes  me like a garment,  I began  from an elementary  
scale  till I slowly  graduated  into broader  advancements.  Today
101






I have thousands  of years  behind  my back  in the exercise.  It has 
become  my sport  and my meat even while I also recognise  that 
the road on which  I tread leads to nothing  of benefit.  Even  so, 
It is not everyday  that I gain a space  in the midst  of men, for no 
matter  how I exert myself  once the man whom  I tempt  bars his 
doors to me, all my efforts  come to futility.  Which  brings  to 
mind a recent  occasion  when I engaged  in pushing  a man to 
brew a little trouble  with his wife but the cool-headedness  of 
the good-for-nothing  woman  proved  too much for me. When  
her husband  addressed  her roughly,  she responded  with 
humbleness,  when the man squeezed  his face in pretended  
anger  she took hold of laughter.  Even so was I expelled  from  
their  midst  and I resumed  my wandering. ’
After Satan had thus unburdened  his heart. Endurance  
pointed  out that time was flying  and that our attention  should  
hence  be turned  to the issue of the labourers.  And so Satan  led 
him onwards  but instead  of some habitation  of men as was our 
expectation  it was a zoo which  we confronted,  the very dwelling  
of lions,  apes, antelopes,  elephants,  camels  and cattle.  We were  
no sooner  arrived  here than Satan raised  an arm to the skies  
and ordered  twelve  of the lot to fall out. We almost  excreted  in 
our trousers  to watch  what followed  - we watched  the twelve  
beasts  transform  gradually  into men and the devil presented  
them to Endurance.  Observing  that Endurance  was 
wide-mouthed  from surprise,  he cracked  into another  laughter  
and said, ‘I turned  them to animals,  demoting  them from the 
status  of men. They  never  leave where  I place  them;  I set them  
aside  for menial  jobs ’.
Even so did we visit hell. It was a most evil place and we 
rejoiced  greatly  after we finally left it, heaving  the beatific  
winds  of outside  into our lungs  once again.  The terrains  reeked  
of unspeakable  odours,  none of its spectacles  was particularly  
pleasing  to the eyes. We heard no hymns,  we overheard  no 
laughters,  there  was no allowance  for a man to do so much as 
enjoy the company  of his neighbour.  Melancholy  filled it to 
spilling.
102






When we finally returned into the dome of Heaven, and 
relieved our heads of the caps of invisibility,  and Endurance  
had recounted  details of our adventures  in Hell to his mother,  a 
beautiful  gentleman  in immaculate  white garment  entered the 
house. He conversed with Endurance in a unique and 
flavourous  language,  a tongue which was alien to our ears. We 
were not to know that he was one of God’s taskmen  and while 
we were yet standing  pondering  over his true identity  he turned 
from us and walked out to the open and waved his hand in 
one imique direction.  Before we could so much as blink, a 
whole mountain  of work-tools  had set itself up before us. We 
gathered  after his departure  from Endurance  that he was a 
special agent from God and that he brought orders that the 
labourers  from hell should be barred from partaking  in the 
construction  of the House of Heavens-Exalt,  since it was 
not given to messengers  of the devil to stray into the divine 
premises  of the Lord. We were enlightened  further that the 
tools before us were God’s own donation  to the project, tools 
such as carried tags of Swords of Victory, Axes of Triumph 
and Basins of Exaltation.  He also added that with such 
wondrous  tools at his disposal,  our hands would no longer be 
required  and that all we needed to do hence was to stroll to 
the site in the morrow  and watch the execution  of the project.
The following  morning,  we headed for the site to feed our 
eyes. We noticed that even as Endurance  seized a cutlass and 
nipped  a stem with it, the cutlass freed itself from his hand and 
proceeded  to slay the bushes of its own accord. Even in this 
manner  was the axe,-the  hoe and the basin affected.  I will spare 
unnecessary  details — the whole construction  of the mansion 
lasted a single hour, although it was of such height that its 
pinnacles  pierced  the skies. I make bold to declare  that no man 
living can record  the number  of rooms therein.
Having filled our curiosity thus, we flocked back to our 
residence.  I think it pertinent  to point out at this stage that even 
as I speak of ‘yesterday ’, ‘toda/ and ‘the week before ’, it was 
only we hunters  who counted  hours in this manner.  We tried to
103






make the measurements  according  to the number of our naps 
and waking for neither Endurance  nor his mother slept — 
darkness  was a total stranger to them in heaven; they were 
flooded  with light all day and night.
A full week after we arrived here, I approached  this friend 
of ours and hinted him of our desire to resume our journey. 
And after he had flattered  us with numerous  salutations  and his 
mother had given us her blessings,  a certain door was opened 
for us and stepping  through  it, we found ourselves  on a highway 
leading  straight to the Mount of Thought  and we plunged  our 
heads onwards.
AU8f-<tlSwf ‘ -Bns'
Who*'
(tfdfe>if>4'df ’%s»"W’3fe»»i311  Oh'-oJ'  ixatete  swW
■tlfef'fcol*:®)  babfiorf'^^Witti^n  gsiiwblh^SdT
jt/iS-jK-iff#  f'.fji'tbtfflh'fflZBd  adf bfli! aod 3riJ.,3K£  oriJ zbw rennfim  
noii^Bih'  sft abd^-arfb-^ ’^litlSb  W2Sjfentw
b) W^'jbig'iMoEhtuq
'dib-ndt  atebotld'fa^OlfWbi'^bitifcignivil  
itfir 'iMabft  4Md ‘'%o*D?>llrt
H>bfo4  ' ! P4il<aid)l  ^»5nat>uai
zW'if ' . ■(i'biabsf  16 “OiS 1 Ze
(¥fe^{WoW  . i;j;- ) orfw 2i3Jnuri  aw yliwi
104






INHERITED  LUNACY  OF THE  
HOUSEHOLD  OF UNITED  FOOLS
We turned upon the road and hasted unswerving  towards 
the Forest of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.  Nothing  of 
a great significance  raised itself until one unique morning at 
about ten O'clock when we encountered a branching  on the 
right. We observed  a post here with this inscription  - THE 
CITY OF IMMODERATES  WHERE HIS HIGHNESS,  
KING MISDEMEANOUR  RULES UPON THEM. The 
name of this territdry  lacked  much attraction  yet we resolved  to 
set our eyes on it since we could, according  to thinking,  benefit 
in terms of a ^ew wisdoms  therefrom.
We had penetrated  this branching  for a little while before 
we began to notice the township  itself in the distance,  and as a 
matter  of fact, it was the noise coming  from it much resembling  
the babbles of a market which welcomed  us as we neared its 
outskirts.  How a single town could produce  such a volume of 
noise began to amaze us - unless of course, and this we did 
consider,  it was confronted  by the prospects  of a war or other 
unspeakable  excitement.  The clamours came to us in such 
bountiful  quantity  and by the time we were vamp and heels into 
midtown  it had become  difficult  to hear one’s neighbour.  Even 
so, when you took the din apart, the town had its own claims to 
beauty. Pleasure  cars and other motor vehicles  trod the roads 
and bicycles crowded the edges of streets. Much of modern 
values of civilization  were contained  inside it. The only fault, 
and an enormous  one, was in their excessive  regard for timing. 
This was where it became  plain to me that whatever  it is that a 
man sets his hands on in this earth, but which he does in excess, 
is not really good enough.  I had not the slightest  guess that even 
order could produce  its own demerits  when done in excess, for 
large as the town was, it was mandatory  that all the citizens 
should dine in the same hour. Each man must lift his morsel at 
exactly  the same moment  as his neighbour.  When the hour of
105






dinner arrived, a bell was rung and policemen  took their place 
in the homesteads  to see to the enforcement  of that law The 
man who missed the timed transfer of morsels directly placed 
himself  at the risk of the prisons.  No one must shed tears unless 
it was the hour allocated  for the purpose.  We entered  the town 
at the hour of weeping which accounts for the noise which 
nearly deafened  us on our arrival. Whether  you were inspired 
towards  weeping  or not, the lawful thing to do at this hour was 
to stream  some tears and give voice to compulsory  waihng.  You 
were confronted  by a similar fate when the bell of the hour of 
laughter  rang. Such was the case with the citizens  of the town of
Immoderates.When the hour of wailing  had passed,  I strolled  round town 
and came to a certain  shop at the street-side.  Even as I stepped 
through  the gate of the store, a man overtook  me and walked 
past into the counter. This man’s pockets were bulging with 
numerous  currencies,  his purpose  being to purchase  a hat. But 
the moment  he beheld  the beautiful  maidens  of the shop -- and 
they were remarkably  beautiful - he lost hold on himself and 
instantly  gave himself up to vainglorious  conducts.  The ladies 
rose from their seats and conducted him round the shelves, 
swinging  and twisting  before his eyes. A number  of them even 
exalted  him with praises as he dug into his pocket and ordered 
items which he had no intention  of purchasing  previously.  The 
man scarcely  noticed  it until he had emptied  his purse on wares, 
most of which he apparently  had no use of nor planned to 
acquire from the onset. Puzzled by this, I turned towards a 
gentleman  nearby  to ask the identity  of the man and the fellow 
gave his name as Inherited Lunacy who dwelled m the 
household  of United  Fools.
Shortly afterwards.  Inherited  Lunacy himself came to me 
and began to speak with me in a friendly manner and I also 
responded  with friendliness.  I gave in without  hesitation  to Ae 
offer of friendship  because  I was anxious  to create an occasion 
to share with him a couple of lessons in deportment,  for I was 
most displeased  with his act of extravagancy.  We chatted  freely 
106






like old acquaintances  and he asked  to be given  my residential  
address  in the town  which  1 gave to him. 1 asked  for his in turn 
and he gave it to me, promising  to pay me a visit the following  
day.
I left the stores  thereafter  and re-joined  my companions.  We 
spent all the lesser hours before  three O'clock  strolling  after  
which  we returned  to await  five O'clock  which  as I learnt  from  
my friend,  Inherited  Lunacy,  was the hour of dancing.  The 
clock had scarcely  chimed  five when the citizens  flew into the 
streets  drums  in arms.  And soon afterwards,  we spied  Inherited  
Lunacy  himself  in thfe midst of the multitudes;  he had no 
sooner  emerged  among  them than bata drummers  converged  
on him and began  to drum  him on thus: 'He swallows  lumps  of 
debt, he swallows  lumps  of debt, of debt, of debt, he swallows  
lumps  of debt. For pleasure-seeking ’s sake, he eats lumps  of 
debt, ’ike yams, of debt, he eats lumps of debt, and for the 
parlour-lady ’s sake,  he wines  on debt,  he takes  lumps  debt.  And 
foi the lack of thought,  he eats, on debt,  he takes  lumps  of debt.  
But how will you wriggle  out, how, how, who eats lumps of 
debt ’ etc. etc.
This was how they praised  Inherited  Lunacy  with drums.  
Most amazing  of all was how the man himself  tumbled  and 
twitched  to the drums of his degradation.  Our bafflement  
multiplied  when  the man himself  began  to chant  the refrains  at 
the top of his voice.  When  the lead drummer  called  out to him, 
saying,  'Inherited  Lunacy! ’ he raised  his voice  to reply thus, 'he 
takes  lumps  of debt ’.
After  a while  he called  on the drums  to pause  and requested  
a new tune. This according  to him was because  the drums  were  
not really rattling  hard enough.  The drummers  then tossed  
their instruments  on their shoulders  to hail him afi esh in the 
following  manner, 'Inherited  Lunacy, Inherited  Lunacy,  
Inherited  Lunacy,  who lives in the home of United  Fools,  
United  Fools, United  Fools,  when it turns to ill, ah, when it 
comes  to ill you will answer — alone! Alone when creditors  
seize you by the neck. Sons of men recognise  only the hand of
107






juice, the hand of juice, the hand of juice; but when fortunes 
come to ill, when really really fortunes  turn to ill, they will have 
none of that. No, never never never never never And the 
drums rose even higher in volume.
In the morrow, Inherited  Lunacy called at my place as he 
promised  and I re-stated  my own promise  of knowing  his home 
the following  day.
I set out for the compound  of the United Fools at break of 
the following  day in order to pay Inherited  Lunacy a visit. It 
pained me deeply to discover that the hour for weeping  had 
struck even before I had begun to snatch a glimpse of my 
destination.  And it was in the midst of lamentation  that I met 
the members  of United Fools. Even so, beside the compulsion  
of routine,  the dwellers  of the compound  had a private cause to 
lament.  The reason  was this;
There existed a separate  House a few poles away, in the very 
neighbourhood  of United Fools which was famous for the 
name Greed-fuses-together,  Wobiaparapo.  The people of this 
compound  were in a sworn friendship  with those of fools: they 
were indeed  very deeply attached  together.  And it so happened  
that all the men in United Fools were husbands  while those of 
Greed were bachelors.  But husbands  though the men of Fools 
were, none of them had succeeded in giving children to his 
wife. So did it come topass  that the inhabitants  of Greed-Fuses,  
spurred clearly by good meaning,  forwarded  the suggestion  to 
their counterparts  of the adjacent  compound  that their barren 
women,  of Fools that is, be brought  to their own compound  to 
holiday for a full year in order that some fire-scratching  
medicines be devised for curing them. And in truth, the 
house-hold  of Greed was well seasoned  in the art of spells and 
medicines,  and no ill-will attended  their offer. But is it not the 
truth that every man prays daily to be severed from 
temptations?  The man who requests  his neighbour  to unwrap 
his bosom friend’s secrecy  is himself  the creator  of dilemmas.
On that very day, all the women of Fools-in-Unity  were 
herded into Greed-Fuses-together  and a full year had elapsed 
108






since this occurrence  when I went visiting  the household  of 
United  Fools — the second  day in fact after the holidaying  
women  of Fools-in-Unity  were  due back to their husbands.
In that same morning  of my visit, the women  sent words  to 
their men notifying  them that they were no longer  coming  back  
and that they had been  re-taken  to wife by the men of the house  
of Wobiaparapo.  Inherited  Lunacy ’s own wife did her former  
husband  the honour  of a letter  stating  how matters  stood.  I was 
presented  with the letter,  it read thus:
The House  of Greed-Fuses-together,
City of Immoderates,
Thirteenth  day of the eighth  month.
One thousand,  nine hundred  and fifty-two  years.
After  the death  of our Lord.  s ,
To:
Mister  Inherited  Lunacy,
The household  of United  Fools.
Most  dear Inherited  Lunacy,
Even as myself  and my husband  have just munched  
liver over a decent meal, and I am surrounded  by 
stew-pots,  and bowls of yamflour  lean on walls in the 
bedchamber  and balls of eko are spread  all about  me, I 
besought  my new husband  for permission  to scribble  this 
note to you. It was endless  surprise  for me rhe last 
evening  when  I received  your message  that I shoul  d come  
and set eyes  on you. This  is really  because,  without  a doubt,  
both the goat and the sheep in this place  
understand  that I have broken all links with the 
household  of United  Fools;  the ram of the place  must not I I i 
wander  to my presence,  ; f I
And even as I am occupied  presently  with writing  this -
109






letter, my eyes are resting on my new man who stands 
before me robustified  to the feet, he is red as oil in a keg, 
slim to smartness,  gleaming  and stout-limbed,  the very 
buttocks  of velvet. And even as my hand grips this pen 
the man himself  is beckoning  to me, and I am beginning  
to catch the message  in his flipping  eyelids which clearly 
is, ‘rest your eyeballs  on me, wash me with your eyes, I am 
myself  heading  for your path’.
Certain  it is that it will not fail to gladden  you to learn 
that my womb has now swollen for six months and my 
sharpest  intellect informs me that it will not fail to yield 
two large-feeted-  males, to the extent that upon God 
wishing,  when I am relieved  of the sweet load we shall not 
hesitate to speak of my new husband  with such praise- 
‘producer  of twins this man is’.
What of the money you owe me? That which you lent 
for your mother ’s funeral. The matter angered my 
husband ’s brothers when I mentioned  it to them and 1 
advise you most piteously  to hand the money over lest my 
husband ’s relations  should  beset your house unexpectedly  
and extract it from you forcibly.
I will not omit to counsel you over the filth of your 
house, the uncleaniness  of your corridors  including  the 
fumes of dirt on your body. For on my own part, matters 
have long ceased to be as in previous  times, my eyes are 
wide presently  as those of a man exploring  foreign  places, 
my conduct  now suggests  the conduct  of the discerning,  I 
no longer act in the ways of foolishness  and neither do I 
parade myself as one of the bushes. So in the light of 
these, I request you in the very name of the Most high 
God to open your ears wide to the advice which follows;  a 
bowl which has known no washing since eternity is not 
good enough  for drinking  water — for this is your regular 
habit; a stew which lacks oil and lacks salt, peppers  and 
onion and which has dwelled twenty-seven  days in the 
house is not fit for the guts of a self-respecting  man.
110






desist from feasting on such with the inhabitants  of 
United Fools. The morsel which is of equal size with the 
throat is it that a man places through  the teeth; the type 
which is slashed bigger than an infant’s head must block 
all passages to the mouth - place gentleness  at heart 
when you dine.
I have also observed  that your finger-nails  are often 
dark from numerous  cakes of dirt dwelling  therein. This 
of course is brought about by the fact that you normally 
trim them only once in a year. The hair of your head is 
shaggy as thickets of the bush for you weed your head 
only once in a year. Which also affects your skin that is 
blacker than the base of the cooking  pot. The reason for 
that is also that you consider  bathing  an annual rite. You 
must wade all these practices  to the past lest it should 
come to be that you will not be able to attract another 
woman. 1 have myself undergone  many transformations  
and have long desisted from acting as in the manner of 
Fools-in  Unity - 1 clean my mouth as frequently  as once 
in three months, and cut my nails every three months;  I 
affect a similar conduct of frequent cleaning  in bathing 
and dressing  my hair four times in a year. My complexion  
has lately taken to changing and my teeth also which 
begins to approach a sparkling whiteness, craw-craw  
remains only a handful. Sores have become rare of late 
which exalts my body to the level of gleams. Men who 
honour my passing with greeting nowadays  surpass a 
thousand  and ladies who curtsey  my presence  with sheer 
delight total eight hundred.
When precisely  are you coming to visit my husband?  
What about nine days’ time? This is because  he will not 
be able to spare you an audience  any other day; he is the 
head of this compound.  On the day of your coming  you 
must not forget to tie my remaining  possessions  and 
chattels  in a bundle  and place them on the plain of your  
head. You will in displaying  such an act of gentleness
111












arouse my husband ’s good favours. And even on your 
arrival, you shall nol walk straight into my apartment  lest 
punishments  should become your lot. You will instead 
stand in the open until I shall have noticed  you. Upon my 
observing  your presence  and even after I shall have led 
you to the presence  of my man, you must salute him with 
humbleness,  for failing to do just this may lead to the 
consequence  of your leaving through the window  instead 
of the door which bore you in.
Extend my greetings  to the other dunces in the House 
of United Fools.
I am your former  wife. 
Life-in-duplicate.
Even so did the wife of Inherited  Lunacy  write her husband. 
I waited a while after this before I took my leave. Inherited  
Lunacy himself urged me to eat some snacks but my stomach 
was not accustomed  to the kind of meals which they ate in 
Fools-in-Unity.
When I returned  to our lodging,  I relayed my experience  to 
my colleagues  and all of them fell into laughter.  They found the 
men of United Fools at fault and called their gesture a most 
thoughtless  one. The people of United Fools invited trouble  to 
plague them and were confronted  by their due, except that 
their supply was a bit superfluous.  The people of United Fools 
equated men with angels and forgot that the inhabitants  of 
Greed had flesh added to them.
We vacated the city the following  day and continued  with 
our journey.  A number  of our comrades  even suggested  that we 
pay their ruler King Misdemeanour  a visit in his palace but 
when we recalled  the nature of our experience  at the hands of 
the Kings of Edidare, Double and Triple Foolishness,  we 
thought  better of it. We left the place and faced up 'o our road, 
non deviating  headed for the Mount of Thought  in the Forest 
of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.
113






!
B■K
•5U0\
3^/; ■
IRINKERINDO  WEDS  THE  NIECE  OF 
THE  LORD  OF SEAS
But without  a doubt,  a matter  will astonish  you about me. 
Are you not anxious  to ask what this is? — it is this; Since  that 
moment  when we vacated  the place where Elegbara  had 
molested  us, I had not ceased  to dream  about that lady who 
took care of us after Elegbara  chased  me across  the water.  You 
will recall that I have already  told you something  concerning  
my own previous  indifference  to women  and how they had 
repelled  me for the most part. How it then came to be that my 
new-found  affection  for this one had outweighed  even the 
nature  of her generosity  towards  me remained  a surprise  to me. 
To cut a long story short, she took up a unique  space in my 
mind and I had also formed  the habit of alluding  to her of late 
in almost  every  discourse,  to such an extent  that my colleagues  
had begun to leer at me each time I created  an occasion  to 
bring her up for mention  in a discussion;  they began  to needle  
me most mercilessly  on her account.  And what was most  
painful  in all this was that 1 had failed  to take proper  advantage  
of the opportunity  offered  me by the event of our last meeting  
together  and even now when  her affection  has begun  to ride me 
about  like a horse,  I could not set eyes on her any longer.  Low 
spirits  took possession  of me and for no proper  cause,  for it 
was her kindness  which  stirred  my own affection  awake  where  
it had lain in peace.
Before  long and when  I could  no longer  conceal  it within  me 
I confessed  before  my friends  that the lady has PUJ^^med  me 
with the arrows  of affection  and that their poisons  have begun  
to bother  me. Unknown  to me that I was merely  openmg  up 
another  floodgate  of ribaldry.  My comrades  replying  then 
returned  that fhey themselves  had observed  how thewoman  s 
affection  had been pushing  me all over the place of latei and 
that I would be fortunate  if.1 did not end up in the drai 
114






Whereupon  Mr. Filasayepo  came  to me and suggested  that the 
ghommid  of his cap should  go and greet  the lady for me. Good  
friends,  I prostrated  myself  flat on the ground  and urged  him to 
do this for me and without  any delay.  Ah, love lunacy  is terrible  
indeed;  I prostrated  myself  before  a man who was much  junior  
to me, and yet I was the head of the entire  expedition  When  I 
rose from  the floor,  my companions  rushed  at me and began  to 
dust  my body  jeering  thus,  ‘softly,  softly,  master,  softly . It was not 
really  as though  they  meant  what they said,  their compassion  for 
me was pure ribaldry.  The man  who pestered  me more  than the 
others  on this subject  was Mr. Ireke,  he showed  me one or two 
things  on it.
To cut it all short,  Filasayepo ’s errand  spirit flew out to the 
lady and brought  me greetings  from her. Her message  was 
packed  in a letter  which  read like this:
From  The Sea of Memory,
The Recess  of Olokun,  lord of oceans  ) ■ >
L Fifteenth  day of December,  ■
B The year of our Lord
B Nineteen  Hundred  and Fifty-two.
E, Most  dear Irinkerindo,
E I was pleased  indeed  to see the bearer  of your message  
K for 1 have myself  been full of desire to know how you
K have fared since, it simply  appears  as though  you have
■ read my mind. How has it been?  I was rather  astonished
■ to find that you spent  such a length  of time in the town of
B Edidare.  1 trust that you performed  some  feat there.
E I have been asked to greet you by my friends  over 
E here. Do extend  my greetings  to your own companions
■ also. And you must ensure  that we receive  our own share
K of you people ’s snacks  of merriment  from  time to time.
■ I cannot  write  a lengthy  letter  now.
Yours  in truth.
Hl: Affection  of Significance.
115






I was filled  with bliss on reading  this letter,  I could  not have 
been more pleased  if I had been made  a king. I raced  through  
the lines the first time, re-read  them  a second  time and scanned  
them all over again  the third time. I cannot  in short recall  how 
many  times  I read that note. Hardly  satisfied  still, I passed  it on 
to my comrades  and we all sat down to analyse  the letter  
together.  Nor did even that satisfy  me, I began  to question  them  
thus, ‘would you say you enjoyed  the letter? ’ ‘wouldn ’t you 
admit  for instance  that that opening  in itself  is an indication  of 
her own affection  towards  me? ’ ‘ “... ensure  that we receive  our 
own share of you people ’s snacks  of merriment ” just imagine  
that! ’ ‘If she was truly possessed  by my affection,  would  it not 
have been more appropriate  if she said she was longing  to see 
me? ’ ‘You know,  what 1 am actually  anxious to investigate  is 
whether  she will be willing  to befriend  me’. ‘Even so you have to 
admit  that she inquired  after my health ’. Ah, marvels  occurred  
on the road to the forest  of Elegbeje;  marvels  did occur.
That over, I summoned  Filasayepo ’s spirit  and began  to quiz 
him thus, ‘where precisely  was she when you met her? ’ ‘Was 
she indeed  in the company  of her mother  when you arrived  
there? ’ ‘She was not amazed  to see you? ’ ‘Was she or was she 
not curious  about my health? ’ ‘She must have burst out laugh ­
ing when  you delivered  your message  or wouldn ’t you say that? ’ 
‘Now search  your mind more carefully,  she could have sent 
more  messages  than you remembered  to deliver  to me’. ‘Did she 
not ask when  we would  return? ’ etc. etc.
Even so did I pester  the ghommid  with questions.  And true 
enough,  it was after I had quizzed  him thus that the man 
remembered  that she in fact inquired  whether  I sent a letter or 
not and that he had explained  to her that I carried  no writing  
things  with me, upon which  she got some  writing  materials  and 
sent them, thinking  1 could be needing  to communicate  with 
some  other  persons  during  the course  of the voyage.
Worthy  compatriots,  my happiness  at this stage cannot  be 
described  with words,  1 ate a most unusual  dinner  that evening  
and was flushed  by a great vitality.  I had the woman  on the 
116






peak of my mind throughout  the day and when I slept in the 
night she encompassed  all my dreams.  I found that we were  
living together  as man and wife in one of the dreams;  this 
pleased  me so much that in the morning  I approached  my 
companions  and related the dream to them. My friends  
declared  that it was not a particularly  favourable  dream  for, 
according  to them,  if we lived together  in such harmony  in the 
dream  we would  most certainly  be incapable  of living  together  
in like manner  in actual life. You will yourselves  guess what  
nature  of distress  should  engulf  me on hearing  their verdict;  my 
entire  body let out heat and I could  not taste food throughout  
that day. Recalling  this event  now, it amuses  me to recount  how 
I had avoided  Mr. Inulayewa  who interpreted  the dream  for the 
rest of that day. Such  was my grudge  against  the gentleman  that 
I refused  to engage  him in any discourse.  When  even he did so 
much as stub his toes against  a stone I turned  to look in the 
opposite  direction.
But I dreamed  again the night following;  I encountered  
Affection  of Significance  as in the previous  night  but we did not 
wait to behold each other this time before we broke out 
quarreling,  we quarreled  so much  that in the end we were both 
despatched  in opposite  directions;  she turned  to face East and 
I the West.  Ah, my happiness  was great when  I rose from sleep  
for it followed  then that since we were thus separated  in the 
dream  we could now live together  in actual life as man and 
woman.  I went in search of Inulayewa  and cried out thus, ‘I 
have dreamt  again,  we fought,  we fought  in the dream  . And my 
friends  replied  like this saying,  ‘your dream  is favourable,  ah 
your dream  is favourable,  Irinkerindo,  you will wed that lady ’.
Hearing  this, I went tipsy with gladness,  reached  out for my 
writing  things  and began  to compose  an appropriate  response  
to the letter  of Ifepataki.
Towards  the Forest  of Elegbeje,
Sixteenth  of December,
Nineteen  Hundred  and Filty-lwo  years
After  our Lord.  wo
117






Most worthy  Affection  of Significance,
First of all, I must thank you for your letter which 
arrived here of late. I have no doubt that you have begun 
yourself  to imagine what place you occupy in my mind 
before  I sought  a way to contact  you. Only God Himself  can 
bear witness  to how I have felt since that moment  when we 
parted on the bank of the sea of Memory.  I have not 
watched  a single day pass since without  my thinking  coming 
to rest on you, nor hour even for that matter; you stand 
clearly on the pinnacle  of my mind and there shall be no 
way to dislodge  you.
Even so, I shall wish you to understand  that it is not 
every woman  I meet whom I regard in this manner,  far be 
it! I have never admired  any woman  before now, not until 
the event of our meeting  that is; I just could not stand the 
sight of them. For this forgive me — but it is the plain 
truth 1 speak. Your case has taken such a clear dimension  
that 1 have resolved  even from this minute that it is good 
conduct which is called affection, love bears no other 
name for even if I turn hardened  of heart to an extent that 
I forget you as a person, how can I possibly  forget your 
kindnesses  toward me on that day when Elegbara  chased 
me until I fell into water? And supposing  I had fallen into 
the hand of Elegbara,  would it have been possible  for me 
to stand up this day and answer to the name of 
Irinkerindo?  Ah, character  is affection;  you have through 
your kind-heartedness  cultivated  the seed of affection  in 
me! That seed which you sowed .has germinated,  has 
sprouted  tendrils  and has grown stout branches.  Its roots 
have pierced  the very grounds  of my heart to such extent 
that you can no longer be severed  from my thinking.  Even 
as I write this letter, I am convinced  that you are the inost 
desirable  woman on earth. Your head and neck entices 
me wondrously;  the hair on your head, your finger and 
toe-nails,  your front and back, the'eggs  in your eyes, your 
eye-brows,  your teeth which are a shining  white and your 
118






lips are all embodiments  of attraction  to me. Each of 
them is more handsome  than coral. I love your arm and 
your feet, I adore the calves of your legs; your palms are 
more succulent  than the breast of the canary. When you 
walk past, your gait is the gait of honour. I shall be held 
captive forever and ever more by the sheer elegance  of 
your person. Your rising inspires emulation,  your voice 
will lead many men to wish to speak and when you sit, 
sitting itself becomes fashion in the eyes of the 
fashionable.  Most men on seeing you in the course of a 
stroll will wish to partake  in strolling  for the rest of their 
lives.
When I had taken a keen glance at you that other day, 
I came to the rapid conclusion  that the dress you had on 
had been cut to match you from birth. A most important  
crowned-head  will rejoice to be so adorned. Your 
head-gear  embraced  the morning  sunlight  and I suffered 
a full six days dreaming  of your shawl. Of course the tiger 
knows nothing  of his own dignity, and neither the duiker 
— nor you; you cannot fully comprehend  the nature of 
your importance  in the sight of men. It shall be futile to 
attempt to describe  the true nature of your person with 
words, beyond perhaps  that — and this after a man’shall 
have perceived  you with the great imagination  of his 
inner-most  e^es — you are the splendour  of the rising sun 
itself in the harmattan,  its rays giving clarity to landscapes  
after twilight. This is how you stand, my most worthy 
friend. Affection  of Significance  who sowed the seeds of 
affection into me and whose love has mounted me 
presently  as a man might mount a bicycle, conducts  me 
all about like the automobile  and tosses me as it pleases, 
just as the storm on bush leaves.
I am hoping that you will in the light of these 
understand  what position  you occupy in my mind. And I 
implore  you not to take offence  in the slight on account  of 
what I shall ask of you presently,  that is with regard to
119






this affair about my deep attachment  to you. My 
affectionate  Affection  of Significance,  how will you react  
to the news  that I have died an unexpected  death?  I know  
for certain  that such a news will not go deep down with 
you - but 1 regret  to tell you that the fate which  awaits  
me may be more gruesome  than this if the request  which  
follows  should  meet with your refusal.  Much as you will 
wish nothing  of this sort for me, I beseech  you to grant  
the coming  of that day when we shall both be joined  
together  as man and wife.
I hope that these words  will not offend  you at all; and 
if perchance  they do offend  you, I implore  you to put 
yourself  in my own place and forgive  me. I implore  you 
also that you should  not fail - and this regardless  of how 
you receive  its contents  - to reply  to this letter  as soon as 
possible.
Do salute the other members  of your household  tor 
me. I regret  that 1 could  not meet your father  that other  
time - but do forward  my courtesies  to him. If I 
remember  well, you did mention  something  concerning  a 
certain  cousin  of yours  who embarked  on a voyage.  I trust 
that he has returned.  If he has, extend  my regard  to him. 
Farewell  for the moment,  I shall be waiting  to hear from  
you before  long.
Remaining  yours  till the last, 
Irinkerindo.
N.B. - And thanks  for the writing  things  you sent me. Thanks  
once again.
Even so did I bare my mind to the woman  and 1 despatched  
the letter as soon as I had written  it. The ghommid  who has 
turned  my courier  lately  went  off and returned  almost  before  the 
blinker  of an eye. He brought  me tidings  from her and brought  
her regret  also for being  unable  to write  an instant  reply  but she 
promised  to do this as soon as possible  the next day. And 
120






truthfully,  day hardly  broke  the following  day before  I received  
a reply  from  the woman  which  went  thus.
The Rivers  of Memory,  
At the Recess  of Olokun,  
The sixteenth  day of December,  
Nineteen  Hundred  and Fifty-two  
Years  after  our Lord.
Irinkerindo  dear,
I must thank you for your letter which arrived  
yesterday.  I have read it with the thoroughness  it 
deserves.  Once again I apologise  for being unable  to 
write a reply immediately  yesterday,  I was engaged  in 
some  labours  for my father  at the time the letter  came  to 
me. .
And now with regard  to the things  you told me, 1 urge 
you not to be offended  with the reply I shall give — the 
matter  can simply  not be as you outlined  it at all. 1 had 
resolved  since my youth  that I shall not take any man as 
husband  all through  my life, and were it not for this 
resolution  of mine,  it is certain  that I should  have  become  
a mother  long before  now. Several  men have beset our 
house  in the past, all of them asking  my hand in marriage  
but my response  to the whole lot has been one and the 
same — no!
When  I saw you that other time, I was merely  filled  
with compassion  for you and it was for that alone that I 
came up to you to assist  you. And really,  it does not take 
long before  I comprehend  the nature  of a man when I 
encounter  him. I had recognised  the good-natured  man in 
you from the very moment  when I caught  sight of you. 
Therefore,  Irinkerindo,  let us simply proceed  in the 
manner  of our previous  interraction  without  bringing  the 
matter  of husband  and wife into it. Or can you not see for
121






yourself  that it is much better that way? You will find 
parcelled six balls of eko which I have sent to you, 
including six other wraps of boiled bean-cake to 
accompany  them with.
My friends have specially  requested  me to send their 
greetings  to you, especially  that same fellow with whom I 
was chattering  on the road from our house that other 
time; I trust that you recall this still. And do not forget to 
render salutations  to your companions  for me also. I am 
pausing  here for now. White I remain  yours. 
Affection  of Significance.
My good friends, I was covered by sweat when I read this 
note. I exhaled and sighed deeply, not knowing  what reply to 
give the fellow who brought  her message.  In the end, and after 
an attempt to recollect  myself, I asked him to go saying I shall 
be getting  in touch with her in due course. After the man s exit 
I went to my fellows and tabled the matter before them. They 
opined that the reply was not itself a particularly  bad one; they 
entreated me to proceed with my previous nature of 
correspondence  with her and that I should be careful not to 
allude to the subject anymore.  By doing this, they reasoned,  we 
would be getting used to each other more and more and even 
so shall our liking for each other soar. An occasion  could arise 
in the near future which I might deem appropriate  for hinting 
at the idea once again, you’d never know.
I accepted  their counsel and did precisely  as they advised. 
We exchanged  gifts and letters frequently;  whenever  I killed 
game I sent her share and when she herself made some 
delicious  stew, she sent some to me. Occasionally,  I tried to 
pin-point something with remote reference to our earlier 
discourse  in my letters but she usually  kept her silence  on them. 
Even then I began to observe  how warmer  our relations  appeared  
to be growing  with each day passing.
122






I noted down a couple of lessons from this experience.  
Firstly, I came to understand  that unless a man has seen an 
object with his two eyes and he knows for certain what he has 
seen, he must not go about broadcasting  what he has seen. 
Secondly,  a man must consider  it closely  and with great caution 
before he draws his conclusions  about a lady. You will recall 
how I had met this woman  at the riverside  and the nature of her 
questions  on whether I already had a wife or not. Is it not 
enough  a cause for surprise  that the same lady should  now turn 
me down when I finally put my own interest in her to words? 
Thirdly,  I came to see that love is a matter for two persons  and 
not one; if a man craves a woman, no matter the extent of his 
exertion,  if the woman ’s own craving  does not complement  his 
own, matters can not progress  in the slight. It is the same with 
the woman: regardless  of the extent of her craving, if the man 
she craves is not himself attracted  to her then all her efforts 
must end up in futility. Even as I craved this lady I noticed  that 
her own liking for me was breaking  boundaries.
One morning,  I woke up from sleep and the man I first came 
in contact with was Ewe-eye;  he was dressed in a pair of blue 
trousers. And when I had peered through my wardrope  to 
select some wear for the new day, the cloth which came within 
reach was a pair of blue trousers which was a part of my 
legacies  from my father. And even after the dawn had cleared 
and sunlight  lit up the skies, it revealed  a rare hue of blue. And 
yet this happened  to be a day when I was expecting  a message 
from Affection  of Significance.  Even so it did r ot appear as 
though  this recurrence  of the colour of blue was over just yet — 
when her junior brother  arrived  with her message  I noticed  that 
he was himself dressed in clothes of blue; on receiving her 
letter I was astonished  to find its envelope  to be of the bluish 
kind also. In the past she would have sent such a note in a white 
seal. And you will doubtless  guess what significance  this colour 
bears; blue is the colour-symbol  of affection. I tore the 
envelope  open and even as I was doing this, what colour should
123






stare at me beside  this same blue?  The blue of the paper  had a 
somewhat  deeper  hue than that of the envelope.  She wrote  
thus:
From  the Rivers  of Remembrance,
The Recess  of Olokun,
Fifth day of February,
Nineteen  Hundred  and Fifty-two  years
After  the Death  of our Lord.
Irinkerindo  my own.
In your last letter I observed  that you brought  up 
again this affair about the possibility  of our coming  
together  in the near future.  You will recall  how I confided  
to you that other time about my resolution  which  I made  
in my youth  not to wed any man all my days. But when I 
turned  it over again in my mind and I looked  around  me 
to consider  the lives of spinsters  I failed  to pin-point  any 
woman  living this manner  of life I envisaged  for myself.  I 
took into account  also the extent  of your exertions  for my 
sake, all of these factors  making  it apparent  to me that 
whether  I like it or not I must succumb  to your proposal  
before  long, since it will hardly  speak  well of me to refuse  
you completely.  I have therefore  reviewed  my earlier  
stand on this matter  and have also discussed  the issue  
with my father,  he giving his consent  but demands  that 
you send your relations  over for the formal asking. I 
explained  to him that you are in the colirse of an 
expedition  presently  and shall not be able to contact  your  
relatives  back home.  He frowned  on this at first but I then 
went  to my uncle  and sought  his intervention;  my uncle  has 
pleaded  with him and he has agreed.  My father asks 
however  that you write him a letter stating  the affair.  So 
the matter  now rests with you, you should  write  this letter  
at once,  immediately  after receiving  this note if possible.
124






This fellow who brings my message  is my junior  
brother,  same mother  as me. There is no message  you 
send through  him which he will not render to me. I 
perchance,  there  is a special  confidence  which  you do not 
wish to put on paper you can tell it to him without  
hesitation.
I pause  here for the moment.
Remaining  yours.
Affection  of Significance.
I was struck speechless  for a moment  after reading  this 
letter and it took some time before  its content  sank into my 
head.  I tried  to suppress  the excitement  and called  on the youth  
who brought  the letter to have a word with him but the words  
would just not form, my tongue was simply padlocked.  I 
hurried  for my writing  things and wrote a brief note to her 
confessing  that I was in such a state which makes a reply  
impossible  but that I would  be sending  one shortly.
After  I had despatched  the boy, 1 summoned  my friends  and 
extended  this news to them.  They  rejoiced  greatly  and were all 
full of praises  for the lady.
Thereafter,  I picked  up my pen and began to compose  a 
full-bodied  letter to Affection  of Significance,  I despatched  
another  to her father  also. Her father  in his reply  enjoined  us to 
proceed  with our friendship,  inasmuch  as it pleased  both of us 
to do so. , . .
I was amazed  on the day of my visit to their house to 
discover  what manner  of affluence  the woman  dwelt in, it v/as 
hard to believe  that such a unique  personality  could  consent  to 
wed an ordinary  hunter  like myself.  Affection  is sturdier  than 
the brickwall,  it boasts  greater  solidity  than rock termacs.
Filasayepo ’s cap-spirit  grew even more used to me. His 
favourite  dish was blood  and I made sure that that was within 
his reach at all times.  He for his own part had also resolved  to
125






take me on his back to the residence of Affection of 
Significance  whenever  I wished and I exploited  this opportunity  
from time to time; I became a frequent  visitor to the woman ’s 
place.
Affection  of Significance  was a unique lady and stands as a 
worthy example for our ladies of today. Even until that day 
when we were wed, she never behaved  in an ill-fitting  manner 
to me. She was a woman of her words. When she promised  to 
meet you at a specified  spot, she reported  there on the agreed 
minute. Also, she ensured that I offended  no one within their 
household.  I would have hardly arrived in the place before she 
would begin to point out to me those people I ought to greet 
first and those who deserved  even greater courtesies  from me. 
Whenever  her parents passed some comments  about me she 
relayed  them to me, and when she observed  a slight change of 
mood in me she did not hesitate  to ask what was the cause. She 
kept our secret secret and any matter I reposed in her hands 
she guarded after strictly. I found in her a solidly reliable 
person and I placed absolute  trust in her.
To cut it all short we were soon joined together  in marriage.  
Dear compatriots,  it was a unique wedding  the like of which 
will be hard to re-encounter  the world over.
When our wedding  was tomorrow,  some of us voyagers  to 
the Mount of Thought  set out for the house of my wife. Her 
father ’s name was Ajedubule,  he lived on the banks of the sea 
of Memory. The party which accompanied  me numbered  
twenty-four  and those we left behind at our station approached  
a hundred  and fifty. Our number had increased  since the time 
when we left the gate of the town of the Immoderates;  it was 
here that many more able-bodied  men joined up with us.
On the much awaited day we were all draped in colourful 
outfits and soon it was time to banquet at eight-thirty.  Both 
man and beast were on attendance  and myriad delicacies  filled 
the dinner table. The rest of the guests included  ghommids  who 
came up in every sort; beasts sent their own representatives  and 
126






banqueters  trooped  in in large numbers.  The dog had been  
appointed  for the service  of the beasts because  of his own 
experience  in the midst of men. The cat was made  his special  
assistant.  What  was most amazing  of all was that there  was such 
unusual  cordiality  among  the wild beasts,  such that no man has 
ever recounted  in tales. The lion and the stag sat arms in arms  
and played about exhibiting  their innermost  pleasures,  
summersaulting  and jumping.  The cat and the rodent  were in 
t such  mutual  friendship  that the rodent  expressed  desire  to take 
the cat’s daughter  to wife. The seat of the birds was cushioned  
( and luxurious  and doves and hawks chatted  together  freely  
without  one harming  his neighbour.  On the list of invited  guests  
were snakes  and we mixed  in such harmonious  understanding  
that I never  desired  parting  company  with them for a moment.  
You could  caress  the cobra  on the tail for as long as you wished  
without  the cobra  turning  round  to bite. The scorpion  selected  
his seat with the insects,  this was really  because  he had left his 
poisons  behind  at home.  Frogs  and crabs  who represented  the 
fishes  behaved  as gentle.  After  we had all filled  our stomachs  to 
shining,  I noticed that there were no remnants  left. The 
arrangement  of the banquet  was of such exceeding  exactness  
and was marvelous.  None of the guests  arrived  late, each of 
them  came up sharp  on the dot. There  was no noise,  no crumbs  
of food littering  the floor, all of us maintained  complete  quiet.  
The cutleries  for the ghommids  and us human  beings  were  made  
from brass, including  the plates and the jugs. All beasts  on 
attendance  could  speak  like men. The ants found  comfort  in a 
distmct  room and it was from there that they ate and drank  
their share; I for my part enjoyed  their company  in no small  
measure  each time I payed them a visit in that room. Their  
voices were of such a flavourous  quality that they rose 
UautifuUy  like the notes  of the flute. None  of the insects  stung,  
^ose who possessed  poisons  had left them behind.  When  
snakes  visited  the insects  they mixed freely together  sharing  
enjoyment;  I did not myself  stay very long in the company  of the
127






snakes il was a certain  boa constrictor  with whom  1 chatted  
afterwards  who related  this to me. Frogs  rubbed  snakes  on the 
head  and they all returned  smiles  for laughter.  Ah! it was great
. hlo^nnd ’peace. . shall no, forge,  ,ha, «•  e 
world turned upside  down to such extent co vs carr^eQ  
nrt’imancies  of goats  and cocks  grew  teeth,  giving  birth  to cats. 
P X reSved  the wedding  outfit from certain  ghommids.  I 
was donned  in a larvish  garment  of gold, my shoes  and cap a 
had cracks  of gold pasted  on them.  But whilst  I was laden  thus 
tith gold,  it amazed  me to discover  that my apparel  was Ifeather  
light - danshiki,  trousers,  under-vests  and so on. dress  o
colleagues  were not as richly decked  as mine but they 
alittered  too from  the decorations  of gold patches.
" S we proceeded  to the site of the wedding  proper  A 
number  of ghommids  conducted  us to a certain  vestibule  from  
mv room  which  was allocated  to me by my father-indaw.  This 
wL a spacious  yard cushioned  by velvets  and lined  with  brass.  Z X  X  back of a horse,  a ho,«  rchich  Ub-red  
the weight of diamonds  serving it for ornament.  S 
goodTooking  youths and maidens  lined by -
These youths ’ dresses  let out bright sparks for they glowed  
lorn head  to bottom  like starlight.  Even as the stallion  which  
straddled  raised  a hoof to move  forward  the youths  burst  into a 
certain  melodious  tune; their voices  were more handsome  tha 
the voices  of birds.  I rode on with grace  and gentleness  throug  
ihXssage  which  was a Ml ,wcn,y  minulcs  ,rek in Icngih  and 
as long  in breadth.  Its floors  were  a multitude  of blue
We approached  a certain  seat in an auditorium  and with mj 
friends  placed  right behind  me, I lowered  into U. Hardly  was 
seated  when a loud gust of jubilant  cries seized the: w 
neighbourhood.  The overjoyed  crowds  raised  their voices i 
Tne uXy  cry, ‘here she comes,  behold  the bride ’^Even  as sh 
emerged  gunshots  were let off and drummers  and lingers  
over themselves  at her feet. Flutists  piped away and^m  n
tunes inter-mingled  with thuds of outsize  drums.  The flutis  
128






were  lined  in her front and clad in identical  uniforms;  following  
immediately  behind  them were children  whose  clothes  tingled  
with sequins,  they numbered  sixty in all. And coming  next was 
an immense  quantity  of maidens  in clothes  of flowering  colours.  
After them were three maidens  and three youths  standing  on 
the right and left, these were of the same mother  as my wife.  
For her own part. Affection  of Significance  settled  simply  in a 
chariot  seat of blightless  gold,  pulled  by sixteen  horses.  Metallic  
ornaments  rasped as the horses walked past for assorted  
decors  covered  them from head to feet. Observable  also on the 
right and left of my wife were two identical  chariots  preceded  
by sixteen  horses  each and occupied  by two senior  brothers  of 
my wife. Diamonds  rattled  diamonds  on my wife ’s body  for her 
dress  was pure diamonds,  that including  her shawl;  she glowed  
like rainbow.  Ajedubule  my father  in-law  followed  next in his 
chariot  of brass,  he being  the last of the procession.
When  the congregation  had done  with melodious  hymns  and 
guests  had taken their seats, the priest called on me and my 
wife to step forward.  He inquired  in the presence  of the crowd  
whether  in truth I desired  the woman  as my wife and I replied  
to the affirmative.  That done, he bade  me repeat  the following  
lines after him;
‘I, Irinkerindo,  son of Oyindayepo,  a human,  who lives in the 
House  of Wandering,  and is journeying  currently  to the Mount  
of Thought,  in the Forest of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  
Deities  swears  to take Affection  of Significance,  daughter  of 
Ajedubule,  who lives on the sea of Memory,  niece of Olokun,  
as my wife. I vow also before  man, ghommid,  spirits  visible  and 
spirits  invisible,  before  the snake  and in the presence  of beasts,  
before  birds and before insects,  before the frog and in the 
presence  of crabs  that — even as I am married  to her she will 
never  know  suffering  or anguish  from  my hands.  I swear  to take 
proper  care of her and ensure  that she does not experience  
hunger.  If she falls ill 1 will seek after curative  medicines  and if 
I understand  not the cure for such ailment,  I will summon
129






ifiife
specialists  in medicine  for the purpose.  Nor will this suffice,  I 
must be aware of the fact that my own cares are enough  
medicine.  Therefore,  if she complains  of illness,  I will feel her 
body and take her temperature;  when she complains  of cold 1 
shall find her coverlet  and ask what she desires  for dinner,  and 
having  told me her choice  I shall order that such a meal be 
prepared  for her.
‘I will not stay away for too long outside  my own home and 
behave  as one who cares little for his wife. He is an ignorant  
man who forsakes  his home  or deserts  his woman  m illness  and 
prowls the streets supping  and wining. I pledge also that 
regardless  of the gravity  of her offence  I shall never  lift an arm 
to strike her. This is because  the man who strikes  his woman  
strikes a most delicate  possession  of God and so demotes  
himself  from the status of man; he thus becomes  comrade  to 
madding  dogs.  I will always  accord  my wife ’s relations  their due 
respects,  for one who berates  his in-laws  pulls curses  to his own 
head, the man who drips curses on his wife ’s parents  turns  
himself  to a man of woes.  When  my wife discloses  the worries  
of her heart to me I shall attend  to them m die most befitting  
manner.  When  she asks my counsel,  I shall give her counsel  to 
the best of my understanding.  I will not turn my home  to a hub 
of melancholy  and neither  will I give malice  a chance.  Instead,  1 
shall crack jokes with my wife, exchanging  chatters  and 
laughters  with her all my life. I vow also before  you all that J 
shall watch  after my eyes and not permit  covetousness  a space  
inside  it My wife shall remain  beautiful  and attractive  to me all 
my life. In sickness,  she will remain  attractive  to me; m good  
health  she will attract  me; when she conceives  and her belly  
becomes  protuberant,  and even when her lips dry up and her 
skin also becomes  wafer  dry, she will attract  me. I will protect  
my wife from disgrace  at gathering,  ensure  that she never  lags 
behind  amongst  her mates;  I shall never  desert  her m^hardship.
I am aware  also that she is not my mother ’s child,  if she offends  
me I will hold on to patience.  Even if I must harbour  a little 
130






anger I will learn to eraze anger from my mind, tempering  my 
anger with laughter.  I make promise  also today that no matter 
' the depth of my anger I will never let out ill-fitting words
through  my lips. I realise also that my wife may or may not give 
me children.  If she does, I shall shower thanks on my Maker 
and take good care of the children  which are gifts to me from 
my Creator. I recognise  also that this wife may not give me 
children,  if this emerges  as my share from the Owner  of today I 
will not grant that this disrupts the peace of my home. It is a 
most evil custom  amongst  races where childless  women  believe  
that their lives are spoilt and think that their well-being  is at an 
end, blaming their maker for having created them in the first 
place. A man may live his life without a child and still make 
sweetness  of life, even better than certain fathers of children. 
Some mothers give birth to chaos, inflicting deep ills on 
mankind  through  their offsprings.  Above all, I, Irinkerindo  who 
weds Affection  of Significance  today implores  you all to raise 
the voice of prayers  for me that, this weighty  load under which I 
thrust my neck today be made light for me by the Immortal  
God; that the Owner of this day shoulder  it for me, that the 
Invisible  God shoulder  it for me, that He who speaks and backs 
up words with deeds should Himself shoulder it for me. 
Therefore,  you wife of mine. Affection  of Significance,  give me 
your hand now that I may wear a ring of diamond  into your 
finger as covenant  that from this minute I become yours and 
you mine, your happiness  becomes my happiness  and your 
sorrow my sorrow, your relations mine. Here comes the 
moment  when two souls fuse together  as one.’
Even thus did I read my oath on my wedding  day. After I 
had repeated  all the swears before the ghommid  who was our 
priest, he turned to my wife and bade her repeat the words that 
fefollow:
T, Affection  of Significance,  daughter  of Ajedubule,  a 
ghommid,  who lives on the bank of the sea of Memory,  niece to 
Olokun receives Irinkerindo,  son of Oyindayepo,  a man, who
131






lives in the House of Wandering  and is journeying  presently  to 
the Mount of Thought  in the Forest of a Thousand  and Four 
Hundred  Deities,  as my husband.  I vow before man and before 
ghommids,  before spirits visible and spirits invisible, before 
snakes and in the presence  of birds and insects, before frogs 
and crabs that even as I am married  to him, I am aware of the 
fact that he is no toy or ludo, that he is of great importance  to 
me. I am aware also that from this minute  I depart my mother  s 
home and become  mother in my own home. I will watch after 
my lips, the secrets of our home I will reveal to no man; words 
which my husband  entrusts  in my hands I will not transport  to 
my mother ’s house. I make pledge also this day that even if 
things change  so much that my husband  wallows  in poverty  and 
goes to sleep without dinner, my affection  for him wiU remain 
solid as ever. And if even it occurs that sickness  pins 1^ to the 
ground, that he grows old before his time and Ids beauty 
diminishes,  so much that he no longer swanks  with pride on the 
street, my love for him will not waver. I vow also that I will not 
own two mouths  like the trumpet,  saying I am off to the stream 
even while I am heading for the farm, calling someone my 
relative even while he is not related to me in the sli^t. I will 
take great care of our home, take good care of our riches and 
be not extravagant,  not resembling  one who scatters  the wealth 
of the husband aU about. Food-preparing  is of utmost 
importance  of my obligations  as his wife, I shall prepare  hini his 
meals and well without lateness.  I will take proper care of my 
husband  in sickness for I recognise  the fact that she harvests 
curses on her head who ignores her man in the hour of need, 
picks one of the dresses the man had purchased  for her and 
tramps the whole town. Woe follows the head of the woman 
who for the lone fact that there is a misunderstanding  between 
herself and her man trucks the secrets of their home to the 
public. I can see that it is a most evil conduct  for the woman 
who claims food money from her husband  but goes her own 
way, deserting the kitchen. I become aware also from this 
132






moment  that humble  words  draw kola from the pocket  while  
harsh  words  pull the sword  from the sheath;  whenever  I offend  
my husband  and he feels anger towards  me, I shall offer him 
humble  apologies.  There are countless  women  upon earth  
today who consider  it a self-belittling  thing to ask the 
forgiveness  of their men when they offend  them; I know  it for 
certain  that such people  differ from the gorilla  merely  by the 
skin, their skulls  are those of beasts.  Also, I understand  that it 
is my paramount  duty to note the likes and dislikes  of my man 
and act towards  him only in the manner  he likes; words  which  I 
know will arouse  his annoyance  I shall not let pass my lips, 
neither  will I make  him eat a dish he does  not cherish.  When  he 
forgets  something  on the floor I shall preserve  it for him 
carefully.  I shall keep my house  clean and grant filth no place  
inside  it. I shall arrange  our belongings  orderly,  exerting  myself  
as appropriate  on those tasks which are a woman ’s. If I give 
him children  I will give thanks  to my Maker  and if it so occurs  
that I am childless,  I will not carry  bothers  on mv chest unduly  
and declare  that my well-being  is on end, traversing  home  after  
home and passing  from one man to another,  turning  
myself  to a worthless  woman  who finds no seat in man ’s house.  
It is clear to jne also that the wife of worth is she who seeks  
respects  for her man in public  and places  him on the pedestal  
of honour.  I shall take good care of my appearance,  tie my 
headgear  as is most fitting; I shall clean my teeth and body  
regularly  and give my head the required  plaits;  drape  myself  in 
decent  clothes  and place  proper  shoes  on my feet, trimming  my 
finger  and thumb  nails also. I shall see to the fulfilment  of all 
these things even till the day when death shall do us part.  
Lastly, no other man shall catch my fancy except this 
Irinkerindo  who dwells  in the House  of Wandering. ’
So did my wife read her lines and the congregation  took 
some more hymns and sang them. Thus was my wedding  
ceremony  concluded  and we withdrew  to the house  allocated  to 
us. It was nightfall  before  my wife was handed  to me and sharp
133






on the dot of day-break  the following  morning,  we turned back 
to our camp in preparation  for a continuation  of our journey. 
This time we had no use of Filasayepo ’s cap-spirit  for taking us 
back to the camp, one of my wife’s brothers  had suggested  a 
certain route which made our camp only a short distance.  We 
returned  safe and sound in the end to the rest of our company 
who could not witness  this grand matter.
It will surely baffle you to learn that for good four months 
after this we did not catch a glimpse  of the Mount of Thought. 
What brought this about was the fact that we paused for 
varying  lengths of time in places. For instance  we stayed three 
full months in a certain place known as Rest and Peace. This 
turned out to be a uniquely  attractive  city and I accepted  the 
suggestion  of my friends that we stop there for a brief rest so 
that I might enjoy the company  of my wife for a little while. 
Consequently  we tarried in this place and enjoyed our stay in 
no little measure  but time will not permit that I recount  all the 
things which we experienced  there. I will not fail however to 
give you some briefs about a particular  house which my wife 
and I touched in the city, the name of which was 
Story-tellers-in  unity. Their sole occupation  in this place was 
tale-telling.  A certain man lived there who could tell stories all 
his life without  pausing  for one minute.  His name was Inherited  
Tales. Let me quickly  unwrap  three of the fables we heard from 
this man. Inherited  Tales.
Once upon a time there lived three men; the name of the 
first was Olowolayemo,  the second  was Vain-pleasures,  Afeaye, 
and the third was Greed-leans-back,  Okanjuwafehinti.  These 
three men were hunters and they often went on hunting 
expeditions  together  in the forest as a team. Deep inside the 
jungle one day, they came by a ghommid  who started to race 
toward them with warning  yells of ‘Death! ’ ‘Death! Death! 
‘Death! ’ on his lips. The three men were astonished  to see this 
ghommid  shouting  in this manner  and they tried to stop him to 
ask what precisely  it was that he had on his trail. The ghommid 
134






replying  told them that it was Death  whieh  he had just bumped  
into, and assured  them alst) that if they themselves  wished  to 
know  Death  in person  they should  go yonder  beneath  an Iroko  
tree and there  they would  find him.
There  is no braveness  to match  that of a hunter,  hunters  are 
men of steel. The three men resolved  that they would  set their 
eyes on this Death  and so headed  for the tree in order  to meet  
him but on reaching  there, rather  than meet with the death of 
their expectation,  it was twelve  huge sackloads  of coins they 
were confronted  with. It amazed  them  greatly  to find that it was 
mere money  that the ghommid  had called  Death.  And as they 
stood  pondering  the matter,  a cock crew nearby,  suggesting  that 
a town was just round the corner.  Even so did these three  
embark  on a brief debate  over what should  be the fate of their  
joint find and arrived  at an agreement  that it was best to carry  
the sacks home  only after nightfall,  fo-- carrying  them in broad  
day-light  might give them the appearance  of thieves.  That  
concluded,  hunger seized them and they despatched  one 
among  them to the town that he might buy them food and 
drink.  These  men had indeed  been lost for a long time hunting  
in the wood  without  even coming  near to the trail ot game. It 
was Okanjuwafehinti  whom  the lot fell upon to go to town and 
fetch  food.
Greed  had scarcely  left for town when his two remaining  
companions  commenced  a seminar  on the visible  advantages  ol 
only two men owning  all that money. How convenient  that 
would  have been!  They  reasoned  that it should  be easier  to split 
twelve  money-bags  in two ways rather  than in three. It would 
certainly  be more judicious  that way. Before  very long, they 
concluded  that there  were no two ways to it, they would  have to 
cut their friends  down  with their guns the moment  he returned  
from  the town.
But Greed-leans-back  on his own part, on the way to the 
town had also begun to ruminate  on the advantages  it would  
have fetched  had he but found all that wealth  alone. Ha, he
135






undispulably  would  emerge  the wealthiest  man up and down  
the entire country.  Soon enough,  he too ironed  out a smooth  
plot for disposing  of the other two, and reaching  town he 
purchased  food and wine and also purchased  poisons  such that 
whoever  tasted of it would hardly  live an extra two minutes  
before  he began  to crow like a cock on his way to heaven.  He 
mixed  the wine with the poison  and began  his return  trip to the 
forest.
The moment Greed-leans  appeared  in the distance,  
Olowolayemo  raised  his rifle and drove  furnaces  into his body.  
And as he staggered  to die, Vain-pleasure  picked his own 
weapon  and also battered  him to pieces.  The two men then 
reached  out for their food and stretched  on the grass  to eat and 
drink to the success  of their murderous  design.  They ate and 
drank solidly  for excitement  penetrated  them down to their  
bones Hardly  was the meal over when the two men began  to 
roll on the ground,  writhling  in the throes of instant  death.  
Thus concludes  the first talc which  1 heard  with my wife from  
Inherited  Tales in the House  of Story-Tellers-in-Unity.  Of all 
the deaths  of men, avarice,  especially  as touching  money  is 
chief.  Now  to the second;
Once a certain  palm-bird  made its nest on a corn stalk in a 
farm and flew out regularly  to seek food. She left her children  
behind  in the nest to overhear  the farmer  who was just about  
contemplating  an appropriate  date for cutting  down the maize  
farm, that they might be privileged  to know in advance  
when to desert the stalk and seek roof elsewhere.  The bird 
returned  at dusk and asked  what was the farmer ’s resolution  on 
account  of the farm today. Her children  reporting,  explained  
that the farmer  had sent his son to the town to ask his friends  to 
come and help him harvest  the corn, since he was ‘^^tjemely  
busy and would not be able to pluck them himself.  T e ir 
when it was told this burst her cheeks  with laughter  and said, 
‘lets us hold our peace  a while longer  kids and not hot er our 
heads about going away a.s yet for few of the friends  of men
136






love them to the heart. Men are mostly undependable,  those 
people  the farmer  has sent for will not come’.
And true enough, the next day came and went without the 
expected  friends surfacing.  On that day, the bird went her way 
searching  for food as before. In the evening when she came 
back she asked her children  what were the farmer ’s comments,  
and the children  informed  her that the farmer had sent word to 
his relations that they should come and help him pluck the 
maize. The bird replied her children in this manner, ‘sit you 
here and merry, there will be nothing  to it, for several relations 
of the sons of men are not worth relying upon. They will not 
pluck corn’.
And truthfully  again, the next day broke and the relatives 
preferred  all manners  of excuses and the bird headed out for 
food. At night, the bird inquired  what was the latest news and 
the children elaborated  that he had sent a message to his 
in-laws  to come and perform  the task. The bird on hearing  this 
guffawed  and said, ‘In peace I say sit you, some sons in-law 
indeed are good and these are few, several of them are worse 
than household  debt’.
Events the following  day proved the bird to be right once 
again for nobody  emerged  and the bird flew out to resume  her 
duty. But on coming back in the night it asked what were the 
farmer ’s words for this past day and the children  explained  that 
the farmer has resolved  to wake up early and tackle the job 
himself. This brought  great distress to the bird and she asked 
her children  to get their packs together  fcr instant flight saying, 
‘the palm of a man deceives  him not, the heart of a man is his 
catechist,  since this man has resolved  to wake and perform  his 
task himself,  it will surely be performed ’.
And true to the bird’s calculation,  the farmer did not wait 
for dawn to arrive when he gripped his matchet and together 
with his sons, set out to pluck the maize but failed to catch the 
bird for she had known  what man could do.
Even so did we come to the end of the second tale in the
137






House of Story-tellers-in-Unity.  The third is longer than the 
previous  two and is even more exquisite.  Hear how it goes:
In those days there lived a powerful king who owned an 
excess of wealth and possessed  men of exceeding  influence  as 
children; villages under his fold were numerous as night 
crickets frolicking  round the surface of the sky. But a small 
affair has tarnished  the beauty of the mammal bird, her arms 
are by far longer than her limbs. The king had three sons who 
were also his eldest. Grown-ups  though these princes were 
none of them had taken a wife, this because it was the same 
woman whom each one of them sported and ear-marked  to 
take to wife. There had been a certain close friend of this king, 
a man in whom the king reposed  a great faith, even before the 
time when he ascended  the throne, and no sooner did the king 
ascend  the throne than this man died, leaving  his only daughter 
whose name was Ewadapo  under the king’s care. After her 
father’s death the young lady came into the palace and was 
raised as a princess.
Let the truth be spoken, Ewadapo  was an uncommonly  
beautiful thing. Her body was glazing smooth, so were her 
hands and her feet, her head and neck were all of moderate  
building.  Exceedingly  attractive  was this lady. Clothes  fitted her 
like gloves and beads sat with ease on her shoulders,  her shoes 
fitted her like hooves on the feet of a duiker..  When she smi e 
at you you rejoiced  with great feasting,  when she greeted you 
you slaughtered  six cows, when she frowned  on you you fell flat 
on your back and somersaulted  seven times; such was her 
beauty, and consequently  she earned herself the epithet, 
‘moderation  befits a woman ’, in addition to her name o 
Ewadapo.  ,
It was this woman that the princes marked down or 
marriage.  The word was passed to the king and he replied  that 
there was little to it, he would devise a formula  through  which 
Ewadapo ’s authentic man shall emerge. He summoned  his 
three princes to his throne and offered them three bags of 
138






money, asking them to go abroad and with the money purchase 
whatever articles they deemed impressive. The man who 
acquired the most impressive article would wed Ewadapo, 
moderation  befits a woman.
The three princes set out on their way together and after a 
while came to a certain crossroads  where they all separated 
and each man went in his own distinct direction. But before 
they parted, they all resolved to meet at the same junction on 
their way back, the man who returned  first must wait the return 
of the others. So agreeing  they set off.
Now the eldest prince bought himself a mat, wherever he 
wished to go and no matter how distant it was, all he needed to 
do was sit himself on the mat and command  the mat to take 
him there, and it was certain to do this without the trip lasting 
longer than one minute. The elder purchased  a giraffe’s horn, 
this had a hole plumbed into it from one end to another; the 
use of this being that wherever  a man wished to see in this earth 
he was only required to glance through the mystery hole and 
that place would come clear to him. But in his own case the 
youngest  man came back with a fruit, this fruit was very durable 
and was harder than walnut. No matter how acute a disease 
was or sickness,  all the sick person  was required  to do was sniff 
this fruit and he would instantly  emerge a healed person.
When they all converged  at the appointed  spot, each man 
displayed his article before the rest; the second eldest 
presented  his horn and explained  the use of it. But as he was 
doing this, one of them suggested that they snatch a brief 
glimpse of Ewadapo,  the very cause of their labours through 
the horn’s hole. And when they peeped through the hob, what 
did they see? Ewadapo  had been hiid prostrate  on the ,^ound 
by sickness and it was apparent that if something  urge nt was 
not done about it she would die in five minutes. Quickly they 
took their places on the mat and were flown right into 
Ewadapo ’s quarters.  And soon as she smelt the magic fruit she 
rose on her two feet healed. The; king heard these things and
139






summoned  his sons to his throne to address  them in the 
following  manner:
‘My dear sons, I have the pleasure  to pronounce  to you that 
you have all performed  well in this test. You have all purchased  
wonders  with the resources  I offered you and none has 
surpassed  the other. If your three miraculous  items'  had not 
worked  together,  it is clear that Ewadapo  would have died 
before  this minute.  If there had been no miraculous  horn, how 
could  you have guessed  what danger  beset your lover?  But for 
that wondrous  mat, could you have arrived  smack on the 
minute  to save her life? And if there had been no healing  fruit 
how would  she have survived  the grip of death?  Even so none  
of you has deserved  Ewadapo  moderacy  befits the woman  
more than the other.  I will rather  now set you a fresh test and 
the one who scores  highest  in it shall have Ewadapo.  The new 
examination  is this: let the three of you go for your arrows  and 
pouches  now and proceed  to the field at the back-court,  there I 
shall myself  watch you shoot your arrows  forward,  the one 
whose arrow travels farthest  shall emerge as husband  for 
Ewadapo.
The princes  rushed  to their rooms for their pouches  and 
arrows  and dashed  to the field of the back-court  to wait their  
father.  The eldest was the first to shoot, his arrow travelled  
some distance  and it paused.  After him came the turn of the 
second  eldest who selected  an arrow and sent it off, that 
travelling  some length, went past the eldest ’s arrow and 
vanished  completely.  And lastly the youngest  stepped  forward  
to try his hand. As soon as his own arrow out-distanced  the 
eldest ’s it stopped  to rest. When they were done, they stood  
aside and waited  patiently  for their father ’s verdict  -which  went  
thus: ‘Since  we can hardly  trace the arrow  of the second  eldest,  
it is only fair that he stands  disqualified  from the race. And 
since the distance  of the eldest ’s could not match  that of the 
youngest  whose arrow surpassed  it, he too will have none of 
Ewadapo.  The youngest of you shall wed Ewadapo,  
moderation  is a woman ’.
140






On hearing  the king ’s judgement  the eldest  man turned  his 
head into the forest,  for the woman ’s love penetrated  him far 
too deeply.  When a man loves a woman  to the bottom  of his 
mind and is denied  the right to wed her, eonsternation  floods  
the floor of the stomach,  melancholy  bends the neck of the 
elder  and the throat  refuses  passage  to food, pain takes solace  
in the feet surpassing  even that of the one who bears an 
elephantiasis  of the feet, dark thoughts  rock the man like a 
debt, bitterness  encompass  him as it does for the prisoner,  a 
full-grown  man trembles  in his stride, his lips turn dry as a 
pregnant  woman ’s, saliva in his mouth condenses  also 
approaching  that of a man racing,  the gait of a thoroughbred  
man rids itself of fashion,  coming  near to the gait of the 
bumpkin,  his temperature  rises higher than measurement,  
dwarfing  that of the examination  candidate  who fails in his 
scholarship  or an able-bodied  man stumbling  on a smooth  
pathway.  For these reasons,  young men who make cheek  
promises  of marriage  to ladies  are like killers,  so are ladies  who 
enter into slippery  consent  of wedding  with men everyday  of 
their lives. God has blazed  a road juicier  than the white salt 
for mankind  and yet they persist  in making  bitterness  of it.
The second  prince  rose and began  to seek his lost arrow  
everywhere.  He was not long searching  however  when  he found  
it, but even as he bent to pick it up his eyes fell on a certain  
doorway  leading  through  the ground  to the interior  of the 
earth. And when he edged  closer,  he found inside it a huge  
ladder  having  legs entrenched  far into the grouno  and he began  
to climb it down into the interior.  On arriving  in the base of 
earth  he found  himself  in a magnificent  palace  with rich decors  
of velvets  and all such luxuries.  And as he turned  to begin a 
careful  inspection  of the place his eyes riisted on a woman  
sitting  in a huge throne,  and was excessively  beautif  j1. The 
woman ’s throne  was taller than the throne  of any king up on 
earth,  and no woman  living could match  her beauty:  her skin 
was clearer  than the day old baby ’s, her flesh even more






succulent  giving the impression  that she had no bones in it; her 
fore-fingers  were well trimmed  and soother than the body of 
the palm insect — her hands were plain as clear banana  leaves. 
Beads on her chest were as the sun-rise;  you could not in short 
describe  the woman ’s attributes  with words.
She waited patiently for the man to recover from his 
stupefaction  before she let out a smile, that disclosing a 
snow-white  teeth which in itself was sufficient to drive any 
living soul mad; sat still she did, her eyes piercing  straight and 
began to address  him thus:
‘I am the crown princess of the interior of earth. In my 
father’s treasure  are diamonds,  brass and all precious  things of 
the soil. Even before I had reached  the age of twenty-five  have 
ghommids  begun to beset my house in large numbers,  all asking 
for my hand in marriage  and numbering  up to five hundred;  so 
were elves of all shades but to all of these my response  have 
been a repeated  no. And after my twenty-sixth  birthday  men 
who poured into our house surpassed  seven hundred but I 
turned all their requests to the wind for even while I am of 
certainty  a crown princess of sprites, none of them attracted 
me. I have been settiue  my eaze on you child of the world for 
sometime  before now and on you alone have I put my mind. I 
have placed you under investigation  ever since and have kept a 
comprehensive  dossier of you in my home from time to time. 
Word about your miraculous  horn has come unto me, even so 
have I acquired knowledge  about the mysterious  mat and 
healing  fruit of your brothers.  I have followed  with my eyes the 
rugged path of your hardships  in the service of love, to such 
extent that I had resolved  even before today that you are worth 
more than that wiiich you seek, you are far deserving  a more 
fitting woman  than Ewadapo ’.
Thus did the woman bare her mind to the man. Replyin g, 
the prince pleaded that he had been flattered  out of his wits 
and that he certainly  could not deserve  such a beautiful  woman, 
all to his little self. This only served to make the crown princess 
furious  and she rebuked  him like this:
142






‘Ha, what a man of humble  nature  you are! Can you not see 
that it is mere humility  which  makes  you say this? And have you 
failed to realise  that you are of even greater  importance  than 
me? You are noble  in your own right and more  handsome  than 
any man within  the human  kind. Sit here close  with me and chat 
me up for 1 am a lonely woman ’. When the woman  had 
entreated  him like this, he complied  and consented  to stay with 
her. They sat together  hence  and made  good company  to each  
other,  the woman  doing  her best to put comfort  and well-being  
within  his reach.  Before  long they grew so used to each other  
that they held discourse  on diverse  issues,  sharing  each other ’s 
confidence.  And soon enough  the woman  also began to act 
towards  him as a woman  might act towards  her husband  and 
the prince  himself  reciprocated  in equal respect  as her man.  
Without  unduly prolonging  the tale, the two were joined  
together  in marriage  afterwards  and their wedding  proved  very 
grand.  The occasion  brought  the citizens  of heaven  into contact  
with dwellers  of the earth, spirits pounded  yam, bog-trolls  
placed  amala  on fire, spirits  of highlands  interracted  with those  
of lowlands,  miraculous  things occurred  on the outskirt  of 
heaven.
This man lived six full months  with his wife before he 
remembered  his hometown,  and when he was growing  truly  
homesick  he approached  his wife one day and asked her 
permission  to visit his father ’s kingdom.  The princess  gave her 
consent  but warned  that he must not reveal  where  he has been  
to anyone;  if he was asked he would simply  reply that he is 
happy  where  he is.
On appearing  over land, the prince  assumed  the full bearing  
of a king; horsemen  and elegant  ladies  in pleasure  cars formed  
his escort;  beings  of various  sorts rode on motorcycles  ahead  of 
him heralding  his approach.  As for him he sat delicately  in the 
back seat of a spacious  car, relishing  the very splendour  of his 
kingly  outfit.
When  he entered  into his father ’s kingdom  with his escorts,  
awe-stricken  people  shouted  with marvelling.  The king was
143






most pleased to be reunited with his son and his joy 
overflowed.  He was much happier on that day than the day of 
his enthronement;  he welcomed  his son back home with great 
feasting and took great care of him and his retinue. Parents 
normally  love to keep the secrets of their children  secret; when 
the king had asked where his son had been all that while and he 
had declined  he made no further mention  of it, the mere sight 
of his long-lost  son gave him more than enough  satisfaction.
This man stayed with his father until it was nightfall  and at 
day-break  the following  morning  he returned  to his wife in the 
interior  of the earth. From that day, he visited his father’s place 
frequently  and this gave the king much happiness  but where he 
came from was a mystery  to everyone.
Before long the children  of the world set to their favourite 
act of intrigue  and paved a way through  into the middle of this 
father and his son. One stocky devil approached  the king one 
day and began to address  him in the following  manner:
‘Kabiyesi,  may God grant that you live long, and may you 
always wax stronger  than the arms of the enemy. The children 
of the ear^tk will simply find it impossible  to inflict a harm on 
you. Birds in the sky do not experience  hunger, the king will 
never suffer for want of food. Fishes never reach exhaustion  in 
the water, offsprings  within your home shall always multiply. 
Abundance  is the name of feathers in the home of the dove, 
your wardrope will never shrink in size. Man is difficult 
Kabiyesi,  and it is you elders who devised the proverb saying 
good conduct is it which accompanies  a man to the streets. A 
man’s death squats right beneath  his own roof, that is the name 
which  we gave the goat of Ajayi while predestination  is the name 
to which Olugbode ’s ram answers.  A stranger  does not recognise  
the slave of the house all by himself,  it is the relative  of the owner 
of the house who points him out — this son of yours Kabiyesi,  a 
big child he is, and without a doubt he is up to 
something.  The lot of the children of nowadays  are no good, 
watch him, and take proper care. And as I observe events, if 
144






urgent  care is not taken,  that day is fast approaching  when  he will 
bring  warmen  from afar to over-run  this kingdom  and pluck  you 
to the ground  from your throne.  This is the observation  1 have 
made,  the king will live long ’.
My dear friends,  the rich man begrudges  the early morning  
rain for even as he is confined  to his room, the pawn also 
snores  with pleasure  in his mat chamber.  Words  of this sort 
could not fail to bring sadness.  The king began to swell in 
annoyance  against his son and the affection  he had nursed  
towards  him gave place  to hatred.  No matter  how close a father  
might  be to his son, he will not pray to witness  the day when his 
Own son will slay him. Hence the king began to scheme,  
plotting  ways of bringing  about  the downlall  ol his son.
He invited  his son one day and asked him to go and bring  
him an object that was most difficult  to find. This object the 
king did not mention  by name;  he was hoping  through  this to 
put his son into utter confusion.  Nor did he pause here, he 
employed  the help of some  evil-minded  men lor the purpose  ol 
investigating  the actual  dwelling  of his prince;  those men went  
off and returned  shortly  with their find. And armed  with the 
facts, the king confessed  to his son that he has now known  his 
secret  and that he has now found  out what nature  of being  he 
has been staying  with. He commanded  his son to ask his 
ghommid  wife to present  him with a certain large cloth, a 
mysterious  one. This cloth he explained  could  be folded  up and 
made  to diminish  to the size of a kernel,  that a man would  keep  
it inside  his fist without  anyone  knowing  what he has inside  it. 
And  yet once  distended,  the cloth  would  enlarge  to a degree  that 
it would  encompass  a whole  town.
The man left his father with head-dropped  sadness  and 
returned  to the palace  in the bowel  of the earth. On the very 
day a third party finds his path into the middle  of two lovers,  
the pleasure  therein  takes Hight like a beast that catches  wind  
of the hunter ’s dog. Melancholy  sinks its buttocks  in the 
European ’s chair leaning  on its backrest,  and matters  turn
145






upside  down.  The man appeared  before  his wife frowning  for 
his heart  was heavy-laden  and sorrowful.  He unburdened  these  
things  to his wife and she broke into laughter  saying  it was a 
very small matter  indeed,  adding,  ‘this cloth which  your father  
asks for is in the bottom  of my wardrope;  the sons of men 
surely  have entered  between  you and your father  but there is 
nothing  serious  in this, the more difficult  part of it belongs  to 
the plotters  of evil; whatever  happens  to you happens  to me, 
your yoke is my yoke ’.
The day following  the man woke up early  and took the cloth  
to his father  only to be awaited  by another  request.  This time 
the king asked him to go in search  of the source  of the seas,  
there  he would  find a particular  leaf which  shines  and flowers  
forever.  A man only needs  to keep it in a safe place  to check  on 
it everyday  and he would  find a large tablet  of gold by its side 
daily.
This man left his father, filled with mad anger but on 
reaching  his wife she urged him to exercise  patience  and 
cautioned  him against  the sin of angst  against  one s father.  God 
bless us with a wife of bliss, this woman  arose once again and 
handed  her husband  the leaf which  his father  had demanded  of 
him.
This man came to his father once more and handed  him the 
leaf but the yet dissatisfied  father had arranged  another  task 
for him. He addressed  him in these  words,  ‘1 have to thank  you 
especially  for these things,  my dear son, but you will still run 
another  errand  for me which  I will assign  you. 1 want you to go 
now and bring me a certain  ghommid  whose  tales I have been  
hearing  long before  now. He is hardly  taller  than three feet and 
has a broomlike  beard  at least twenty  feet long. He is also fond 
of carrying  a very heavy  iron with him on his shoulders,  an iron 
which  is of equal weight  as eight sackfuls  of palmnuts.  Go on 
now and bring  this man to me. 1 greet  your energy  my friend ’.
The man departed  in silence for the matter had now 
dwarfed  response,  he hissed incessantly  until he reached  his 
wife in the bottom  of the world  but when  she heard  this latest
146






i?i-
demand from her father in-law, she broke into laughter  and 
said, ‘Aah! this man your father wishes to see is my older 
brother. His nature is quite unearthly  and if your father does 
not watch out he will kill him. This is because  he has a most 
horrifying  appearance  and yet disapproves  of the sight of 
people trembling  before him. The man who stands in his front 
and betrays the slightest  fright he deals with an iron blow on 
the head. ’
Of a sudden, the woman called out to her brother with a 
very loud voice and a rumbling  sound replied her from the 
depths, more resembling  blasts of thunder,  making the whole 
vicinity to tremble. When he emerged in the distance, the 
ground began to split underneath  him as he trod it; all the 
ghommid-servants  and maids of the couple vanished into 
hiding. Fear gripped man, fear gripped the children of 
bog-trolls.
And even as he emerged  thus his sister began to hail him in 
this fashion, ‘welcome,  you are welcome my brother; tread 
gently, tread gently, the son of the land tramples  it gently, we 
offer you our courtesies  my brother,  gently tread. You are the 
owner of me, you are the owner of lands.
It was in this manner  that the woman  showered  praises  on her 
brother  and bade him welcome.  His eyeballs  were redder than 
kernel,  his beard fanning  him as he walked.  When the ghommid  
had demanded  to know the purpose  for which he was summoned  
and his sister had explained  the matter  to him, he bade the man, 
his sister’s husband  lead the way to the palace of the king of the 
earth, preceded  by his outsize beard. Even as the man and 
ghommid  appeared  above land, men scattered  to the wind. They 
entered  midtown  and headed  for the king’s place.
The king and his advisers  were in council  when they arrived 
but the king had scarcely  snatched  a glance of the man «4>en he 
began to tremble like one suffering from severe cold, his 
garments  shaking like forest leaves in the middle of a storm. 
This sight angered  the ghommid  in no small measure  and he
147






raised an arm and brought down a heavy blow on the king’s 
head, his head broke to pieces and his skull-fluids  scattered  all 
over the ground. Next, he unleashed  wrath on the chiefs and 
advisers and tore them to pieces. He then summoned  all the 
townspeople;  like it or not, they quickly assembled,  and he 
installed  the man, the husband  of his sister as king over them. 
Next, he went underground,  took his sister and made her the 
queen, the king’s wife. Like it or not, this too, they had to 
accept.  Thus ends the story - the third tale that we heard in the 
house of Story-Tellers-in-Unity.
Night had started to fall over the landscapes  about the time 
when we closed so I rose, and together  with my wife, we retired 
to our place of abode. We left the town the following  day.
..
. .j,i IMO,1^0
....sowarfj  jfidi lennam  Jrfi ni
' 3»l j+nci q: isJaiaiiH  fcijs
! • ,’<.1 ' , pd! 01 iid
hs& a.s^i,,3dj fipvy  ,(bU9
pdT .bijjw sn|} <0 avqflft ©ejsaqqjfihimmoii;,}
>. , , d. t;;. t'asd  3>;.; -wd b-djsqrfibna.nij'CilJiifn  barsSKM 
bpyhis tii raiwi  gniT Mt'-
s4 .rtadw  rife bdif ijni;! wd
mo4 Snh-d)j. ‘ , .Ai! ' dHK>r<-&l';nj£^9d
B lo,3tt*binqs41  . firbjfee iiabimHai'
148






THE  TOWN  OF FALSEHOOD
We witnessed  much with our eyes after leaving  this place but 
our time is far spent and we cannot go into all of them now. 
This notwithstanding,  I will not leave out completely  one 
personal experience  which I underwent  in a town called 
Deception  or The Town of Falsehood.  This is how it went; 
There is no man living without  his cross, and a cross — the kind 
I am about to tell you of - hardly parts ways with a man 
without  leaving  a scar or mark behind.  I had a cross during this 
voyage, this cross was my second-in-command,  Ayederu-eda.  
You will recall the nature of address this man gave before the 
king of the tpwn of Edidare  and how he had aimed to court the 
good favours of that king with his speech. Ayederu  was a man 
who erected a cabin for calumny in his head, who leased a 
bedchamber  inside it to conspiracy  and gave his hands strolling 
on the street with avarice. He was a specialist  in the art of 
reduction,  to an extent that when he was even luring a man 
close to his grave, that unsuspecting  fellow continued  to hold 
him as the best of confidants.
He had started  to be on friendly  terms with one of my wife’s 
junior sisters since the time of my wedding,  before the period 
of our departure  from the bank of the Sea of Remembrance.  
None of us took much notice of this from the outset but as time 
went on, the two of them began to get on well together, so 
much that before two months had expired they were already 
dating to meet in private. It was this sister  of my wife who was 
to come up with us from the Sea of Remembrance  after our 
marriage,  for she and her senior sister were so closely attached 
together  that they could not bear to be parted from each other. 
Even so did she add to our numbers  and it proved a bonus for 
Ayederu  who rose promptly  to the occasion and seized his 
chance  for intensifying  his courtship  with the lady.
Also we were to observe about the time when we returned 
from the wedding  ceremony  that Ayederu-eda ’s left arm had 
withered.  And it was from this time that he transferred  his gun






to the right hand. Where  this paralysis  came from we did not 
know  neither  had we a guess about  the cause  for it, and since  
the man himself  had given  no explanation  in this respect,  we also 
were  careful  to say nothing  about  it.
One day it happened,  just as we were camping  close to this 
town. Falsehood,  that this man Ayederu-eda  came to me and 
drew  me aside  to share  a confidence  with me. He told me that 
if I desired  to be wise I had to stop putting  trust in my wife for 
she, according  to what he told me, was now fond of sneaking  
out every  night to a spot where  she meets  a man he suspected  
strongly  of being her lover. He also assured  me that he has 
himself  glimpsed  my wife a number  of times  in the company  of 
this man where  they warmed  unto each other  and the man gave 
my wife several  kisses on her lips. Ayederu  rounded  up by 
saying  that if perchance  I had cause to doubt what he was 
telling  me he was prepared  to lead me to this secret place  
where  my wife would  meet with this lover after dusk, to the 
effect  that I would  be privileged  to see this spectacle  for myself  
and with my own eyes.
This story terrified  me greatly  and I begged  him to take me 
to this place he spoke  of. Had I but known  that this Ayederu  
man had asked my wife ’s sister to pick some of my wife ’s 
clothes  — headgear,  buba and wrapper  — and come to their  
usual meeting  place garbed  in them that night. Mis reason  
which  he gave the lady for asking  her to do this was, he was 
curious  to see how she would  fit in the clothes  of her senior  
sister.  In the night,  Ayederu  came  for me as arranged  and bade  
me follow  him. He led me to one isolated  area and there  he left 
me saying  he must return  to town immediately  so as to attend  
to an urgent  matter  which had just cropped  up. However  he 
charged  me before  he retreated  thus that if I was patient,  nty 
wife would  not be long coming  to meet with her said lover of 
stealth.  So saying,  he left me.
Little did I guess that even as this man deserted  me it was 
for him to gain a chance  to change  robes  for his new role as the 
'-".'er of my supposed  faithless  woman.  As I stood on the spot 
150






waiting,  my wife ’s sister appeared  from afar, and according  to 
what Ayederu  had plotted,  a convincing  replica  of my wife 
from the distance.  She strolled  up to a certain spot .and 
stopped,  to be joined  soon by my friend  Ayederu-eda  who took 
his entrance  in his new costumes.  These  two hardly  waited  to 
see each other  before  they embraced  and the man clung  closely 
to the woman  and proceeded  to press his face against  the face 
of his companion,
Friends,  I leave it to your imagination  what nature  of colds  
should  engulf  me at this stage.  Sweats,  cold sweats  poured  from  
my body as from a rivulet and I turned from the 
spot and faced the road back to the house to wait her return.  
And as luck would  have it for me, when I got back to the house,  
my wile had indeed  gone out visiting.  So 1 picked  my matchet  
and sat down to sharpen  it in expectation  of her, saying to 
mysell  that she would  come  back soon to this house  to meet her 
death from my hand. Those  said, I helped  myself  into a chair  
and began  to wait for the time when she would  return.  It took 
very long before  she came back but by this time I was already  
snoring  heavily,  for no sooner  had I hit that seat than my brows  
began  to feel heavy  and I dozed  off into a sound  sleep. By the 
time 1 awoke  it was already  mid-night,  my wife had returned  
and had gone into the room to sleep leaving  her room ’s door  
open. I sneaked  to the place where  I left my cutlass,  picked  it 
and headed  for her room but had not taken two steps when 1 
perceived  the two walls  ol the doorway  to be closing  in and in a 
short moment  1 was faced  by a blank  wall and no door at all.
1 returned  and regained  my former  seal and waited.  It was 
even as I was retaking  my seat that I saw the contracted  wall 
yawn  and the doorway  resurfacing.  This 1 quickly  responded  to, 
laid my hand on my cutlass  once again and tip toed to the door  
but it merely  teased  me as before  and sealed  itself  off before  I 
had come close enough  to it, so 1 returned  to my station  and 
watched.  The matter of this door was getting  to become  a 
mystery  to me but I resolved  that I would  be patient  and beat
151






the recalcitrant  nuisance  to its own game  the next time around.  
And rarely  had I permitted  the passage  to reappear  for a third  
time when I rose cutlass  in hand and with lightning  speed,  
plunged  a foot between  the merging  walls.  This move I already  
made  before  I realised  that it was a thoughtless  thing  to do for 
the presence  of my foot in the margin  did nothing  to deter  
those  walls or to change  their minds,  they clapped  shut on me 
just the same leaving  my limb trapped  in-between.  The grip of 
the walls was not too harsh  but was firm enough  to hem it m 
inextricably.  This was my wife proving  to me that she was no 
ordinary  man but a thoroughbred  ghommid.  And it was for this 
reason  that I resigned  myself  to forced  contentment  in the state  
of imprisonment,  for I was indeed  getting  to be ashamed  of 
myself  now.
I remained  on the spot till day-break;  in the morning  when  
my wife woke,  it was a different  exit which  she took to leave  her 
room. Hence my wife devoted  herself  most zealously  to her 
morning  chores  and behaved  as though  she knew nothing  of my 
predicament.  When  breakfast  was ready she called  me by my 
name and immediately  my curbs gave way and 1 regained  my 
liberty.  I stood and advanced  on her with cutlass  still in hand  
but found even as I planned  to raise my hand to deal her a 
cutlass  blow  that the cutlass  in my hand  had grown  heavy,  so that 
1 could  hardly  lift it up.
My wife stood watching  my futility  in silence.  She smiled  
thinly  and ordered  me to hand the cutlass  over and I obeyed.  
Whereupon  she asked me to the breakfast  table to which I 
declined.  This made  her angry  and she declared  that I had little 
choice  in the matter  so, grudgingly,  1 had to obey. She herself  
took her place by me to see to it that I ate, so seeing  that there  
was no other  way, 1 picked  a couple  of morsels  and 1 ate them.
When she was finally satisfied  that I had eaten well, she 
entered  the house  and started  to pack her things.  And when  she 
had done with this, she summoned  her sister and questioned  
her to my face on her whereabouts  the previous  evening  and 
152






her sister told us where. Next she asked her to show us what 
clothes she had gone out in and her sister showed them to us — 
my wife’s clothes. Also my wife’s sister admitted to going out 
the previous  night with a male acquaintance  of hers but did not 
mention  him by name.
After all of this had been over, my wife turned to me and 
said, ‘I am sure that you heard the things that she said. The person 
you thought to be me was not me’. This over also, she 
addressed  her luggages  thus, ‘take all of these home, I shall not 
be long myself. And soon as she uttered those words the packs 
vanished.  Then she turned to me again and began to«ry in the 
following  manner:
‘Ah Irinkerindo!  ah Irinkerindo!  Despite all I have done for 
you! Despite all I have done for you you do not trust me! You 
do not trust me and you are planning to kill me! Me! Me! 
Irinkerindo  you were plamiing  to have me dead! You forgot all 
that I have meant to you! You forget how I have slaved for you! 
How I strove for you! Ah you could not even remember  how I 
have dashed to the north and how I dashed to the south, 
running helter skelter that you may have comfort! — all this 
you forgot! And all the expenses  of my parents! None of these 
count for anything  with you anymore!  Thanks then! Thank you 
then! It is just as well! I thank you! I thank you! I am returning! 
I am returning home! I am returning to my mother ’s houSe! 
Farewell  Irinkerindo!  Farewell! Fare you well! Fare you well! 
Fare you well! etc.’
Even as my wife cried ‘Fare you well!’, her feet began to sink 
into the ground, gradually,  until she was completely  swallowed 
up and I started to shiver from my head to my feet. I called her 
by name and made my pleas but nothing that I did yielded any 
fruit, I begged and begged but the matter was past forgiveness. 
I entreated  her to have mercy on me but she would not hear 
me, for my offence pained her far too deeply.
The next time I saw that fellow Ayedefu-eda  and I tried to 
wreck my anger on him he defended  himself by saying he did
153






not realise  that my wife ’s sister was into such habit of stealing  
out in the clothes  of my wife to meet with men in the night.  He 
questioned  me also whether  it was all right for him to espy 
somebody  whom he believed  to be my wife with some other  
person  and not let me hear of it? He himself  had been seated  
some nights  before  on the same spot where  he took me to sit 
and had seen those things - was how the man arranged  his 
self-defence;  and since neither  my wife nor her sister  had made  
mention  of Ayederu-eda ’s name, no other option  was left me 
but that I let him go.
But then another  happening  followed  this one which  made  
this man and I to turn our backs on each other. It was in this 
way: it happened  again  one day that as I was walking  along  in 
the company  of some  fellow  hunters  on a lonely  path a gun was 
fired at us from a truss in the bush and it lacked  very little for 
the shot to hit me. There  was no doubt  in anybody  that this was 
an ambush  and that the assailant ’s target  was one of us. The 
idea which came into my own head at that instant  was that 
some prospective  enemy  camp in the forest sponsored  this 
attack  and set their agency  on us to await us so I primed  my 
own gun, aimed  and fired  back.  A dead shot was mine and it hit 
the target on the dot. Even as my gun roared,  a voice cried  
loudly  from the bush, hence,  we hurried  over yonder  and with 
great amazement  did we discover  the corpse of one of our 
members,  Ojuayedim,  a close associate  of Ayederu-eda,  
perforated  by my gun-shot.  Ayederu  himself  was present  at this 
scene and even as we identified  the body he put wails of 
accusation  against  me in his mouth,  calling  on everyone  from  
far and near to come and witness  to the fact that I had 
committed  murder.  He decried  and villified  me before  the 
whole  group,  demanding  that I be put on trial. For this cause  
the hierachy  of the expedition  arranged  some sort of 
court-martial  before which I was arraigned.  And since 
Ayederu-eda  himself  was the most senior  of the lot, after me, it 
was he who chaired  the judgement.  His verdict  which  he put 
154






forward  Co the sitting was that I was a die-hard  felon who 
deserved  nothing  short of death  by a firing  squad.  For from the 
evidence  that he claimed  to be having  in his front it was clear  
that I had to be declared  guilty of committing  a wilful act of 
treachery  against  a righteous  member  of our delegation;  a felon  
who brings  the death of his fellow  man about  ought himself  to 
meet with death  of like fashioning  — was Ayederu-eda ’s logic.  
Even so, the rest of the hunters  did not share these ideas with 
him, they rejected  his propositions  and submitted  unanimously  
that Ojuayedun  had died a death  which  fitted him, adding  that 
a man of Ojuayedun ’s outward  character,  who was gifted  with 
such joviality  and gave his respects  to all men old and young  
alike  was not expected  to have behaved  in the way he had done;  
he deserved  his death  no doubt  and there was to be nothing  to 
it. What was most impressive  of all of this was that those  
hunters  made an open declaration  concerning  me that it was 
I alone  that they recognised  as their leader  and their loyalty  to 
me was undiminished.
In this manner  did I excell  out of the matter  and shortly  after  
this we came face to face with the river of blood. We had 
crossed  this river once, close to the time when we passed  the 
town of Edidare.  We were trucked  across  the river at that time 
by a certain  boat but on this second  occasion,  it simply  looked  
as though  it was not the same pool which  we had surmounted  
before.  Even as we drew  nigh to this place  we observed  that all 
the forest  left and right of us was lulled  in silence.  The leaves  of 
the forest,  creepers,  boulders  and trunks  of trees all assumed  a 
complexion  of lighted  red and we glimpsed  no living  creatures  
whatsoever.  Birds  did not wail, squirrels  did not climb  the girth  
of trees,  even  butterflies  were  nowhere  to be found  and we heard  
no news of flies. Not long after this, we noticed  that we were  
approaching  an iron  gate in our front,  a flat wooden  board  placed  
on top of it was facing  us directly  with these words  inscribed  
boldly  on it.
CONFESS  YOUR  SINS BEFORE  YOU CROSS  THE  
RIVER OF BLOOD, CONFESS  YOUR SINS
155






BEFORE  YOU CROSS  THE RIVER  OF BLOOD.  
WHOEVER  DOES NOT CONFESS  HIS SINS  
BEFORE  HE CROSSES  THE RIVER  OF BLOOD  
WILL  CROSS  INTO  CHAOS.  CONFESS  YOUR  SINS  
BEFORE  YOU CROSS  THE RIVER  OF BLOOD.  IF 
ONCE  YOU  HAD  BEEN  A THIEF,  CONFESS  YOUR  
SINS; IF ONCE  YOU HAVE  FALSE-WITNESSED,  
CONFESS  YOUR SINS; IF ONCE YOU HAVE  
COMMITTED  ADULTERY  CONFESS  YOUR  SINS.  
WHOEVER  DOES NOT CONFESS  BEFORE  HE 
CROSSES  THE RIVER  OF BLOOD  MEETS  WITH  
BEDEVILMENT,  CONFESS  YOUR  SINS BEFORE  
YOU  CROSS  THE  RIVER  OF BLOOD.
Even  as we came  up to this gate, its doors  swung  open for us 
of their own accord and we trooped  in. And even as we 
trooped  in thus, the doors  shut themselves  again  behind  us and 
immediately  we found  looking  back a man bearing  a raised  axe 
in his hand  following  us.
When  we had come close to the bank of the river itself, we 
found  another  man raising  an axe ahead  in expectation  of us. 
Beyond  him, we observed  a long metal  slat placed  right across  
the water  which  appeared  to represent  a bridge  or girder.  Now 
it seemed  that we were guarded  from both back and front by 
two men wielding  an axe each.
Even as we neared  the man in the front he gazed  at me who 
was at the lead and said to me, ‘confess  y.our sins lest I kill you’. 
Scarcely  had he said this when my lips seized  control  and my 
mouth  began  to speak  things  of their own accord,  recalling  all 
the sins I had committed  since the day I came into this world:  
the day when I abused a man, the time when 1 berated  
somebody  and I called  woes to afflict some other fellow,  not 
leaving  out my petty infant  thieveries,  all my little little lies, all 
of these things did my lips recount  and I did not have any 
power  whatsoever  over them. After I had done with my own 
confessions,  the man ordered  me to fall behind  him.
156






Next came  my deputy,  Ayederu-eda.  When  this man laid his 
tongue  to confessing  his past deeds  there was none among  us 
who was not frightened  - he said, ‘from my infancy  have my 
mother developed  a habit of sending me to overhear  
conversations  in neighbouring  houses  that I may come back  
and report to her. ft was I whom my mother  sent to pour  
poisons  in the soup-pot  of one of her junior  wives  to the extent  
that that woman  died; I delivered  poisoned  kola-nut  from my 
mother  to her younger  brother  and that man gave up the ghost;  
I turned  the backs  of the king ’s counsellors  on one another  in 
our hometown  through  my devious  means;  it was I that brought  
the life of my mother  to an end so that 1 might inherit  her 
riches.
‘When  the matter  of this expedition  to mount  Ironu arose,  1 
made sure that I spent a lot of money  on Irinkerindo  and his 
men who came  campaigning  with him to our hometown,  hoping  
through  it to get a big position  from him. Even  so the post which  
he gave  me was not very  satisfactory  to me; it was his own position  
that I sported.  I had plotted  killing  this Irinkerindo  seven  whole  
times  but without  success  — I poisoned  water  and gave  him twice  
but he did not drink of it; I poisoned  his palm-wine  
hoping  he would  drink and die but he did not taste of it; what  
did I not try, even got men at him to shoot him down three  
times but they missed  him on all three times. He himself  shot 
Ojuayedun  dead, for it was Ojuayedun  whom I deployed  for 
the fourth  time. 1 lied to him that his wife was meeting  with a 
man in the secret  and it was I who led him to a place  where  I 
asked him to wait and see his wife with another  man in the 
night.  I got his wife ’s sister to dress like her senior  sister and I 
changed  dress to meet her, acting a make-believe  role for 
Irinkerindo  to see. I always  envied  Irinkerindo,  his wife and 
everyday  I desired  that Irinkerindo  should  die so that his wife 
would  become  mine. There  was a time when I stretched  my 
hand to pat her bottom  but my hand withered  on the spot, so 
have I borne  a stump  in place  of a right hand even to this day
157






When Ayederu ’s lips stopped recounting,  the man hiinself 
was overcome  by shame. And the most pitiful aspect of this 
matter was that no man had any restraint oh his lips; each 
man’s tongue simply continued  to dart unstoppably  like the 
stick of a drum. Were it possible  for any man to warn his mouth 
a bit, doubtless,  Ayederu  would have warned  his own; pity. The 
hunters  were amazed  to hear the things with came out from the 
lips of the man.
After him came other fellows whose mouths  also confessed;  
there was scarcely  a single vile left upon the earth which those 
men’s mouths  did not speak out. If we had but realised  that our 
company was filled with such innumerable  bandits and 
cut-throats!  Those who have brought sorrows upon their 
neighbours  did not have count.
It was after each and everyone of us had made these 
confessions  that the man holding the axe commanded  us to 
start to walk in turns on the ledge of metal running  across the 
river of blood. Looking down from where we were into the 
river below, what the human eye encounters  was a most 
horrifying  sight: the place was full of hundreds  of men who had 
dropped  into the river from the top of the narrow ledge. And 
what amazed me the most about this place was that they did 
not die; they hiccupped,  drank and sputtered  in the water of 
blood continually  and were extremely  numerous.  When those 
on the top floating  up had exhibited  their faces to the world for 
a while, they sank again into the deep so that the others in the 
riverbed  would also have a chance to show their faces. And as 
each one among them gulped blood he cried out loudly, 
gulped some more and proclaimed  another sentence  from his 
catalogue  of sins. Sometimes,  a vicious brute raced at one, 
grubbed  off his arm and dashed off from him again while the 
eyes of the fellow  was open to the fact.
I was the first to climb up the ledge on the river of blood. 
Even before my minute came was I resolved  to prepare  myself 
for the worst, for it did not seem to me that any man would 
158






I escape  what was in front. And with great surprise  did I find 
I putting  one foot first oh that object  my two feet moving  without  
f my having  to apply  any effort,  and so gradually  and gradually,  
I believe  it or not, I made it to the other side and awaited  the 
I turn of my companions.
I Ayederu-eda  came next after me and even as he got to the 
I middle  of that ledge,  the iron broke  in two and he tumbled  into 
I the water  beneath.  Before  he could  guess  where  he was, we saw 
I a reptile  home  on him and pluck  out his right arm, gnashed  at it 
I and chewed  while our comrade  cried opening  his mouth  wide  
I in surprise,  thus permitting  water  to rush into his mouth  and he 
[ drank  his first cup of blood.  Ayederu ’s buttocks  scarcely  hit the 
I water  when  the broken  iron lifted  itself  up and mended  and the 
I next man came  on board.  Many  of our friends  arrived  hale and 
F hearty  on the other  side, even Ibembe  Olokunrun;  he knew  no 
1 scratch  whatsoever.  But we lost quite a horde in the blood  
t water,  particularly  those that added  to our numbers  from the 
city of the Immoderates.  A baffling  thing it turned  to be that
, despite  the uncivilized  ways of the men from Edidare,  not one 
I of them  lost himself  in the river.  They  all landed  safe and sound  
! on the other  side.
j I looked  briefly  among  the remaining  lot and was I not 
j surprised  to discover  the famous herbalist  and renowned  
[ denizen  of charms.  Ewe-eye  breathing  out freely?  I recall  that 
i when it came to his turn to confess,  he made no mention  of 
I killing  or causing  the death  of any man in all his life, neither  
I had he brought  harm to bear on anybody;  this was a surprise  
I for me.
I After we had left this place and we mounted  up a hill, I 
E stopped  and counted  the number  of us whose  heads  remained  
f on our necks and we were seventy,  those who drowned  came  
f up to about  one hundred.  This  over,  I assembled  the voyagers  for 
a meeting  to select  replacements  into posts that have become  
vacant  in the company  as a result of the recent  deaths.  And 
with exceeding  joy the hunters  elected  Inulayewa  to replace  i.
159






Ayederu-eda  as my deputy.  He was a wise man, blessed  with 
excellent  character.
And now that we have finally  passed  the river of blood  we 
knew  that we were now closing  up on the Forest  of a Thousand  
and Four Hundred  Deities.  After we had traversed  a further  
three hours from the river of blood we observed  the road 
paving  wider and wider and was flooded  from hence with 
dunes of white sand all through.  Left and right of us we 
encountered  assortments  of trees of the class and breed  of the 
mahogany  and both foliage,  creeper  and barks  of trees in these  
forests  were illumined  white.  The paths  were  swept  glazing  and 
such was the clarity  of this wilderness  that it was possible  for a 
man to peer through  it and behold  a distance  of one full hour ’s 
trek.
One observation  which we made from this time was that 
whenever  we looked to our front and we caught sight of 
someone  coming  in our direction,  we would  lose sight of him 
completely  before  he came near to us and when  we had gone a 
short distance  and we looked  behind  us ‘we would see him 
again walking  away from us, Afterward  we saw a man who 
came  right to us, and when  his eyes had met mine he spoke  and 
said, ‘You are welcome  Irinkerindo^  get prepared,  for the 
animals  are planning  to fight  with  you. ’
160






THE  WAR  OF THE  OUTSKIRT  OF THE  
FOREST  OF ELEGBEJE
This was all that the man said to me. I was even desirous  to 
ask him one or two questions  on account  of what he told me 
but he did not wait, he by-passed  us and went his own way.
Shortly  afterwards  we came before  the gate of the’ forest  of 
Elegbeje,  Forest of a Thousand  and Four Hundred  Deities.  
The object  that our eyes first encountered  here was a giant  post 
standing  erect before  the front of the gate. On the apex of this 
post was a certain  face which  transformed  and retransformed  
itself  continually  every  minute.  When  we looked  up for the first 
time he had the face of man, and when  we looked  for a second  
time he was a lion’s face, looking  up for a third time he was the 
snarling  face of a leopard,  the fourth  time he was a viper ’s with 
flaring  tongue  emitting  venoms.  This surely  was cause enough  
to frighten  us, it was sufficient  reason for us to resolve  to 
retreat  home.  The forest  of One Thousand  and Four Hundred  
Deities  itself  was a scare-laden  place  when perceived  from the 
distance.  It was a dense and impenetrable  black, its crawly  
plants were without number,  thus were the kinds of sky 
piercing  trees  that were contained  in it.
We least expected  that we would  find a gate at the entrance  
to this forest  and no sooner  had we reached  up to the gate than 
the bars paved  open for us but a stocky  being  leapt up from a 
corner  and confronted  us. This, if only we had also realised,  
was the gateman  of the forest — he was draped  in a pair of 
shorts and was long-haired  on his head; he wove his hair 
backways  and left it hanging,  thus permitting  it to tap his 
buttocks  when he walked.  The teeth of the fellow had no 
resemblance  whatsoever  to that of the human  race, they coiled  
out like hook-springs  and gave a man a little scare when he 
talked.  His teeth was blood-red  and his mouth  was in fact full 
of blood.
Even as we planned  to enter the forest the man rooted
161






We ciime  before  the gate of the forest  of Elegbeje.
162






himself  in our way and drove  us back. And when  we asked  him 
why, he explained  that we could not enter  just yet, we had to 
stay on the spot where  we were till the dawn of the next day 
because  the birds  and the beasts  of the forest  had informed  him 
beforeh ’and that they would like to have a word with us. If 
we came to a common  satisfaction  and agreement  at the close  
of the meeting  then all would  be well but that if we failed  to 
come  to a mutual  compromise  then there  would  any remedy  be 
left than that they join in combat  with us. Furthermore,  the 
gateman  told us to give him his own dues and when we asked  
what this was to be, he replied  that it was a drink and that his 
drink was blood. This proved  to be nothing  for one of our 
members  had just shot an antelope  so we gave it to him.
On the following  morning,  I went and spoke with the 
gateman;  he despatched  a message  to the war leader  of the 
animals  whose  name was the Terrifying-babboon.  And when I 
myself  had set eyes on this man, the Terrifying-babboon,  I was 
truly taken by fright. For much as his head and his eyes had 
been human  enough  in appearance  and he spoke as would  a 
normal human being, he was complete  babboon  from his 
shoulders  down to his feet. When he was in the course  of a 
speech  his eyes would  turn embers  red. He was never  in a haste  
when he talked,  instead  he released  his words  from his mouth  
rather  methodically,  bit by bit. Fronds  of the palm had he as 
clothes  for his buttocks,  from his knees to his ankles were  
bangles  of brass lined in that succession  and numbering  up to 
fifteen  on each limb. Even as this man surfaced  and advanced  
on us where  we stood, his left arm gave custody  to a whole  
bundle  of clubs.  When  his eyes had met those of the gateman  
he smiled on him baring his teeth but when his eyes 
encountered  me he squeezed  his face and began  to scowl the 
following  word.s  at me:
T am Terrifying-babboon,  the general  of war for animals.  I 
have come up in the name of every animal  and every  beast in 
this forest,  birds of the air and fishes, snakes,  even trees, to 
declare  our charges  against  you. The animals  have heard of
163






how you slaughter  their children  and how it is that you do not 
just suffice yourselves  with their adults alone but also their 
babes which you have made your sport, killing  one day olds, two 
days old and three days old all alike. They are making 
complaint  about the behaviour  of the men who entered their 
towns before you, that Akara-Ogun  and his group have shown 
them one thing or two. The birds have made their protestations  
also saying they have now discovered  the device by which you 
capture their children,  to the extent that you build your own 
cages to keep them, devising  your own menus which please you 
to give them to eat, thus placing them under perpetual  
confinement,  not ever allowing them a chance to fly about. 
Birds have kept a book of the plain misdemeanours  of 
Akara-Ogun ’s followers,  in particular  one gritless Kako who 
grew so spiteful  in his conceit that he dashed the king of birds. 
Royal king and father of ostriches,  Ogongo,  on the head! Ha, 
do the fishes not tell of your unkindnesses  unto them? Do they 
not tell of how you slay both old and young from their midst 
and pack them all off from the bed of water, hunting  down even 
their eggs from which you invent varied delectable  diets for 
yourselves?  Trees also have brought  report of your callous  ways 
toward  them.
‘So for these reasons  sons of men, prepare,  my battalions  are 
gathered  and readied — lions have no count, tigers simply are 
beyond numbering,  the leopards  are as a thousand  dew drops, 
one thousand  and four hundred  octopi stand as representations  
for the fishes, cobras and boas have opened their mouths  wide 
in expectation  of you. Even trees which hardly can leave their 
spots where they are standing,  they have sent off every spirit 
and every gnome living inside their hollows to partake in this 
battle — spirits of the iroko, spirits of the walnut, sprites of 
paw-paw  stems, all of these are waiting readily to lay an arm 
against  you.
‘These notwithstanding,  they have also demanded  that I give 
you an option, and the option is this — that if you want to 
‘. ent the strife at hand from coming onto your heads you 
164






should  surrender  all your guns to the gate keeper  of the forest  
before  eight-thirty  in the morning  tomorrow.  This they have 
reasoned  will give them the satisfaction  that you have brought  
no purpose  of harm with you. The animals  pledge  once you 
have carried  this out to see you safe and clear to the mountain  
of Thought,  and that no man from among  them  will lay his hand  
on you. This precaution  they are taking  to ensure  that you have 
come harbouring  no secret schemes  in your heads  but that if 
perchance  you will prefer  not to lay down  your weapons,  then I 
am afraid  the heralds  of war will sound  at nine O'clock ’.
. Those were the words of the general of animals,  Mr. 
terrifying-baboon.  And even as he stopped  to speak we 
heard the trees of the neighbourhood  enchoing  out the 
following  phrase — ‘We are thankful  to you, we are indeed  
thankful.  You have outlined  the matter  as we sent you. ’
After the man had rounded  up his address  like this, I 
promised  him that I shall make  mention  of it to my fellows,  that 
we shall put the question  to debate  among  us and make our 
decision  known  to the gateman  in due course.
This we did forthwith.  The number  of our men who voted  in 
favour  of the idea that we hand over our guns did not pass ten, 
all the remaining  hunters  were in support  of the option  of strife  
but I delayed  until eight O'clock  of the following  day before  I 
communicated  our resolution  to the gateman,  asked that the 
creatures  of the forest  prime  themselves  in readiness  for war at 
the appointed  time.
Next I set myself  the business  of arranging  our strategies  of 
warfare;  I made  sure that I set all those  men whom  I thought  to 
be the more intrepid  at the edges  left and right of our march,  
putting  the remainders  in the middle.  My thinking  for doing  
this being  that when the approaching  warriors  of the animals  
began to gain an advantage  over the men of the centre and 
hence  seized  that opportunity  to advance  further  down  into our 
midst,  the sinews  of the edges  would  thus close  in on them and 
start to batter  them  from  both directions.
But the stratagems  of those animals  proved to be an






amazement  for us and the fact that the trees of the forest  were  
also on their side helped  them in no little measure.  For from  
the very outset  of the war when  our men had just gained  entry  
into the wood  did we decide  to home straight  for the locations  
of the enemy  thus underrating  the role of the trees which  we 
would  be leaving  behind  us in the blitzkrieg  that was ahead.  
Those  animals  had indeed  assigned  wood-spirits  to the chests  
of trees before  the time and there was no way for us to guess  
that it was this same body of spirits  which  formed  the regular  
choirs  that sang praises  of the Almighty  God during  services  in 
the crag of trees. Even as we burst into the centre  of that forest  
a hymn rose from the way of our rear in a great indescribable  
sonority  and it began  to embrace  the width  of that entire  jungle.  
The effect of this on us was that, we began to peer to the 
direction  of our backs thinking  that (he armies  of the animals  
were advancing  up hither from that way but the truth of this 
was the very contrary.  Hence  we lost our concentrations  for a 
crucial  moment  and failed  to set our gazes  to the fore.
Not long after this, the infantries  of the animals  began to 
surface  before  us but the manner  by which  they had resolved  to 
meet us was not anywhere  close to what we anticipated.  For 
had not we indeed expected  that powerful  beasts like 
elephants,  lions and leopards  would be at the lead of the 
onslaught?  But no, the theories  of those creatures  had been of 
an entirely  different  kind. It was tiny tiny things like mouses  
and bush-rats  which  swarmed  up at the very front of them.  And 
when those incredible  mass of creatures  had closed up on a 
man and embraced  him biting  us from our heads  down to our 
feet and the shots of our guns had proven  completely  useless  
before  them,  we resolved  that we simply  had to resign  ourselves  
to the very worst. Even flimsy things like frogs and toads  
succeeded  in giving  us a bit of their bothers,  for their incessant  
cries of haww!  hawww!  hawww!  had sufficed  and frustrated  our 
bids to communicate  among ourselves.  When I issued  
commands  to our ranks the pestilential  noises drowned  my 
voice;  we tried our hands  on clubs  and batons  but rodents  and 
166






grass-cutters  simply  leaped  at us and were too numerous.  Even  
so did we strive  with difficulty  until it was dark and both sides  
retreated  to retire  for the night.
Even before the commencement  of this war, 
Terrifying-babboon  had given us an invitation  to dinner  after  
dusk after we of the two sides might have dispensed  with 
warring  for that day. So at night time we all proceeded  to the 
place of the dinner.  And it was with astonishment  that we 
found  a certain  lengthy  table  laid out neatly  in expectation  of us 
at the venue,  with spoons  of silver,  cups of silver and delicate  
plates presented  to us before we took our seats. It was 
ghommids  and spirits  that the animals  made  to play host to us 
and they in fact had also been responsible  for the preparation  
of the dinner.  Terrifying-babboon  they  got a seat at the far edge  
of the table and they made  me to sit on the opposite  end facing  
him directly.  The meaning  of this was that Terrifying-babboon  
was the chief  host and the chairperson  of the banquet.  And we 
would  have enjoyed  that banquet  greatly  but for the presence  
of the ghommids  who sat at the opposite  of our fellows.  For 
some of these spirits  were one-eyed,  the mouth  of some was 
placed  squarely  on their chests, for some their noses were  
completely  absent,  the eyes of some were wide as sauce-pans,  
others among them were long-necked  and they sat their  
prolonged  necks  looking  as if they were trees  beside  the dinner  
table, yet all of these insisted  on chatting  and cracking  jokes  
with us simultaneously.  The animals elected seats for 
themselves  on spots  variously  in the neighbourhood  and it was 
there that they ate for their kinds of buttocks  were not well 
suited  for chairs.
Day-break  the following  day we resumed  our fight and 
behold  most of the fighting  for this day was left to birds. And 
you would  have imagined  that they were large birds  like hawks,  
eagles or aluko but no, those that flew down on us in large  
swarms  were no bigger  than palm-nuts  and they sported  our 
different  members  whichever  pleased  them and pecked  down  
on us from every  direction.  Some  chose  our arms to camp on.
167






some legs, for some it was the top of our noses  and no matter  
how we tried to despatch  them our trials could  not deter  them.  
Even as one died, another  took its place, ah what a great  
visitation,  even to the extent  that we had no time to remember  
our guns, instead  we continued  to fight for the safety of our 
bare necks  with our hands.
When we reported  for dinner in the night, the animals  
brought  an idea that we try wrestling  the day that was next.  
They  also suggested  that at the close of the event the heads  of 
both camps  should  test their hands  in a brief  wrestling  spar - 
this being  my own self and the Terrifying-babboon.
I will not lie, for even while we hunters  had clapped  our 
hands  to approve  these ideas, making  a though  our stomachs  
had been gladdened  thereby,  each one of our hunters  sighed  
inwardly  at the thought  of joining  hands in wrestling  with 
beasts.  But then they were soon to enlighten  us further  that the 
animals  would not themselves  wrestle  with us, instead  they 
would appoint  a couple  of spirits who would stand in their  
place, leaving  out the Terrifying-babboon  alone as the sole 
representative  of beasts who should tug with man. This 
appeared  to be more pleasing  to our ears and we resolved  that 
we shall try our best.
Now,  I am sure you still recall  the fact that both my father  and 
my mother  have died long before  this time, and that my wife 
had also left me; no close  confidant  was left for me with whom  I 
could hold an intimate  discourse  at this time except my 
second-in-command,  Inulayewa.  But despite  this, in that very 
night, when 1 was fast asleep  in the trench  which  the hunters  
put up for me, somebody  entered  where  I lay and woke  me up. 
When  I rose, I found  that it was my dead  father  and this scared  
me. But he stretched  forward  his hand and said, ‘peace  be unto 
you ’ and instantly  my fear left me. He handed  a certain  bottle  
to me which  contained  honey,  bade me to lick out of it with my 
finger and I did. Then he counselled  me further  by saying  I 
should  assemble  all my men and give them this compound  to 
lick in the morning,  the use of which  is that, a certain  power  will 
168






come into whoever  licks from it such that he will gam the 
capability  to transform  into any shape  or form he desires  when  
wrestling  begins  at day-break.  For instance,  if a man wished  to 
transform  into a monkey  and he so much as said ‘I a monkey  
he would  instantly  change  form into a monkey.  Or that if he 
preferred  to become  a boa constrictor,  he would repeat  the 
treatment  saying  ‘I a boa ’ and will be likewise  served.  When  my 
father  had done with these explanations,  he said his farewell  
and left me.
At dawn,  I summoned  my fellows  and recounted  this thing  
to them. Thereupon  I gave them the honey to hck and we 
braced  up in readiness  and sauntered  toward  the place of 
wrestling.Hardly  had we traversed  a half of the way when  of a sudden  
we heard  a melody  of bata drums  coming  from the interior  of 
the forest.  This we soon found  was a music  giving  cheer  to Mr. 
Terrifying-babboon  who appeared  himself before long 
submerged  by his retinues  striding  the ground  with agility as 
they faced  the wrestling  ground.  The words  which  came to us 
from their drums were as follows, ‘Terrifying-babboon,  
Terrifying-babboon,  today  is the day, it is not tomorrow,  today  
is the day it is not tomorrow,  today is the wrestling  day. 
Terrifying-babboon,  Terrifying-babboon,  roll the son of man in 
the dust, twist the son of man in the dust, throw  them to the 
ground,  dash their backs to the ground,  that they may slump  
unto the ground,  jab them in the side, with a pebble,  jab them  
in the side that they may scratch  into their sides wondering  
why. Who is their father?  Who is the father  of man? Who is 
their father?  Who is father  of antelopes?  Who is their father?  
Who is the father  of chimpanzees?  You are the father  of rams, 
who is their father?  You are the father  of sheep,  you are their  
father,  you are the father  of men, you are their father,  you are 
the father  of infants,  you are their father,  father  of adults  you 
, are their father,  the father  of men,  you are their father,  and the 
i father  of men,  you are their father etc. etc. ’






It was exactly  in this manner  that the Terrifying-babboon  
appeared  on this day in the company  of spirits.  The animals  
and birds  which  were in attendance  came  merely  as spectators.  
The spirits which drummed  for Terrifying-babboon  on this 
day were close in appearance  to men, and the bata which  they 
beat were also as normal bata drums. On arrival at the 
wrestling  venue, they stopped  their drums and converged  in 
one spot. Then they signed that I appoint our first 
representative  so I chose  a man from our group  who answered  
the name Stump.  He was well practised  in wrestling  and was 
sturdy. Stump was not a tall man at all, he was much  
abbreviated  but stocky as tree-stump,  his chest broad and 
thick-set,  all suitably  adapted  to the needs of a seasoned  
wrestler.  The sprite whom the animals  put forward  to tug it 
with Stump  was of a considerable  height;  he was robust and 
well fleshed  from his cheeks  down to his legs, scarcely  was 
Stump  higher than his waist, this proving  to be a bonus for 
Kukute  and a disadvantage  for the volunteer.  For even as the 
man aimed  to grab at Stump  one way his hands  failed  to sway  
him. Stump appeared  to be too stolid for him; he affixed  
himself  to the ground  standing  and was firmly  rigidified.  After  
a time, the spirit took hold of Stump ’s neck, lifted  him shoulder  
high with a mind to reach his legs, overturn  him and dash his 
head in one solitary  throw  at a rock nearby  but Stump  had been  
quick to apply his feet mid-air  to the spirit ’s backside;  he 
twisted and twisted, placed his palm on the bog-troll ’s 
ear-lobes  and pulled  forcing  him to moan  out like a cow but the 
gateman  entered  between  them and stopped  the fight, gave a 
warning  to Stump that if he played foul the next time his 
opponent  would be declared  victor. So they tossed at each 
other again. No sooner had their grapple  resumed  for this 
second  time than Stump  seized  fast the buttocks  of the spirit  
and began to pull him in every direction  till they reached  the 
mouth  of a certain  pit into which Stump  dragged  him. The 
gateman  cheered  and proclaimed  that Stump  was the winner.
170






After  this, I chose  yet another  person  from our side and his 
own name was The Cat’s Rear. What a pity that I shall be 
forced  to by-pass  the detail  of his own veritable  exploit  on this 
day because  of the flight  of our time.
Also I shall have to leave out most of the details  of my 
encounter  with the Terrifying-babboon,  in the stead of this, I 
shall stick to the more  memorable  moments  of the contest.  But 
that which  is important  about  the meeting  and which  I want  you 
to note is that we were the very last to lock hands.  When  we 
had sparred  for a long moment  of time, socked,  turn-twisted  
and  joined  in the death  grapple  without  anyone  overthrowing  the 
other, Terrifying-babboon  waxed hot and started  to change  
into various  shapes,  transforming  himself.  It was the elephant  
that he turned  himself  to lastly but I was determined  that I 
would  not transform  to an elephant,  rather  I preferred  egbe to 
place me on his back so that I began  to ride him about  like a 
horse.  That concluded,  he became  a buffalo  and resolved  that 
he would  gore me to death  with his antlers  but I hurried  into a 
rock and when he hit this rock near did it remain  for him to 
break  his antlers.  In the end, he retransformed  to a large river 
and I also transformed  myself  into sunlight,  the hunters  also 
turned  to birds and flew to tree-tops.  When  I began  to shine  
from  high up and my haze heated  down  on the waters  beneath,  
the Terrifying-babboon  agreed,  he doffed  his hat and confessed  
that I was superior.
So did we come  to the end of the fight but this did not imply  
that we had come any near the end of the war. We continued  
our contention  with those  animals  for another  full montli  and in 
many  diverse  ways did we fight with them.  There  cams; a time 
when Ireke suggested  that we permit him to shov/ those  
creatures  one or two feats from his flute for a day and we 
consented,  gave hint of this to our opponents  and askt d them  
to prepare  to meet with only Ireke on the battleground  on the 
day that came next. Truthfully  when day-break  arrived,  Ireke  
headed  for the battle-front  flute in hand  and when  he began  to 
apply  himself  to revelling  in his craft,  no animal  was left in that
171






forest  who did not take part in dancing.  The elephant  grew so 
tipsy in his dance  that he began  to trample  several  of animals  
under his feet, stampeding  them to their deaths.  The monkey  
danced  and leapt  with  joy, man and sprite  raised  limbs  of dance  
and this became our sole preoccupation  on this day till 
night-time  when  we retreated  home  and retired.
Therewith,  Kumodiran  also desired to perform  in the 
manner  of Ireke. He made us broadcast  to the animals  that 
they should  all surface  with their cudgels  and give him a bit of 
an exercise  throughout  a day. And this was what the animals  
and ghommids  did forthwith  arriving  with sticks  and batons  but 
Inherited  Clubs  obviously  had overdone  his bit, for even while  
it was a truth  that his nature  conformed  so well with the strokes  
of clubs, to the extent that if he had not yet received  his 
complete  dosage of them for one day he was not active,  
notwithstanding,  no man ever smacked  him more than forty  
times in one go all of his life. And on this day of which we 
speak, the number of sticks which landed on his body  
surpassed  six hundred;  even so did we lose the man.
Ibembe  Olokunrun  healed  from his infirmities.  He himself  
had repented  of his old ways, mainly  because  he had been  
keeping  the company  of well-meaning  people.  We came to a 
point where  we slaughtered  several  animals  at a time and the 
man ate until he came  to satisfaction  for the very first time. His 
protuberating  stomach  also diminished  to the extent that he 
now began  to eat the same measure  as appropriate  to normal  
human  beings.
We continued  for another  month  after this combatting  the 
animals  of the forest  without  victor  nor vanquished;  actually  the 
matter  was getting  to become  a shame  for us now. One day, 
acting  on an inspiration,  I went in private  and knelt before  my 
God. I begged  and entreated  Him to intervene,  to rescue  us 
from imminent  shame;  my face turned upwards  I bellowed  
piteously  even to an extent that before  the time when I rose 
tears had welled  up in my eyes. And so, one night I saw my 
172






mother  come  up from the dome  of death  to visit me. She woke 
me from sleep and greeted  me; she encouraged  me by saying  I 
should  not lose heart,  that 1 must surely  emerge  victorious  over 
the animals.  She disclosed  how  before  she resolved  to rise to my 
aid, she had asked  and got the divine  sanctions  of God for my 
cause.  Whereupon  she brought  out kola-nuts,  certain  seeds^  of 
fruit-trees  and grains  of corn and handed  them to me saying  
those were kolas of pride, corns of pride and seeds of pride.  
Thus  did she direct  me that, the moment  I rose in the morning,  
I should  serve  the kolanuts  of pride  to the ghommids,  the corns  
of pride to birds and the fruit-seeds  of pride to the animals  to 
eat assuring  me that once I carried  this out, our triumph  upon  
them was well nigh. Those said, she entered  back mto the 
ground  the way she had come.
At day-break  I applied  these items as my mother  schooled  
me, gave all the diverse  creatures  the things  to eat and instant  
was their effects  on them.  One leader  of the ghommid  stopped  
to hearken  to the words  of ten; a sprite which lacked  legs to 
walk with began  to insist upon  being  the chairperson  of sprites,  
duikers  began to disregard  the persons  of the lions, cats 
boasted  to being  the stronger  of tigers,  even birds  began  to pay 
us discreet visits proclaiming  their supports  for us; the 
palm-bird  asked  us to promise  that once we won the battle  we 
shall place him above  the kite. The night owl brought  bribes  to 
us enjoining  us to bar the bats once we overcame  from  
accompanying  him out in their nightly walks; cattle e^ets  
desired  to score higher  in beauty  than peacocks,  they opined  
that they were afterall  immaculate  white  in regalia  so what was 
stopping  us from making  them the king of home  birds?  Even so 
was dissension  sown into their company  and we gained  in our 
chances  upon them. In the battle that followed  after this, the 
birds and the animals  refused  to receive  their orders  from the 
Terrifying-babboon  so that instant  was our victory  over them.
Even  as we dispensed  with this war. we faced  up straight  for 
our destination  on the Mount  of Thought.  But as we found  out, 
it was one thing  even to arrii ’e in the place  and yet completely
173






another to reach close to the tree where we would pluck the 
fruits of Thought.  The tree was located in some sacred forest 
right on top of a cragged  hill called Triumph.  So perilous  was 
the appearance  of this place that I offered to go up it alone; I 
suffered  one thing or two before I could finally surmount  it to 
the very top. And even after I had managed  to penetrate  the 
forbidden  forest and I threw one solitary  glance ahead of me, I 
found again to my surprise  that much visitations  still lay in the 
front waiting for me — for it seemed that the floor of that 
entire surrounding  was spread with snakes and no single 
species of them was left in the yorld which had not made the 
vicinity  a place of habitation;  viperss king cobras with tapering 
tails abounding  there all about. The tree of Ironu was itself 
submerged  by thorns with choking  tips and these were keener 
than the top of needles, they covered the tree from the leaf 
down to the root. Those tribulations  which I underwent  in that 
place, when I begin to think of them cannot, very unluckily,  be 
rehved  with mere words of mouth.  In the end I reached  close to 
this tree, strained  forward and embraced  one fruit which was 
easiest within arm’s length and it was made of silver, turning 
from hence to flee because the neck of that same tree was 
having an angry rush of soldier ants, those persisting  in their 
bites, stuck close onto and pierced  ferociously  through  a man’s 
bottoms choosing  their sports wherever  they thought best. I 
turned from hither to face town after I had bagged this affair, 
to the place where I left my fellows.
But even as I began to disengage  myself from the straps and 
creepers of the forest I was met by a man in spotless white 
garb. He it was who stopped  me and pointed  out that my task 
was not over just yet, that as it was the fruit which I held was 
having little substance without another tree’s fruit called 
Reliance-on-God.  The man gave me directions hence, to 
where I would find this tree he spoke about and I abandoned  
my course and began to seek the tree, which finally turned out 
to be in the same neighbourhood  as Thought  which I had just 
174






left. Flushing  the trunk of this tree of Keliance-on-God  were  
slimes which rendered  every effort I made to climb it a 
frustration.  Seven  whole  times did I entwine  myself  to the tree 
and I fell on my buttocks  on all seven times.  In the end, I had 
an idea, I rubbed  my stomach  with sand and therewith  rose 
with all my strength  to the boulders  where  I found  a fruit that 
was of pure gold,  red bright  and shining.
Even as I packed  my fruits, turned  and began  my journey  
back again I was awaited  by yet another  person - this a 
ghommid,  a seven-eyed,  with his eyes placed  round  about his 
head. He handed  me a letter and when I glanced  at it I found  
that it came from my wife. There she recounts  how she has 
followed  me with her eyes throughout  all my ordeals,  praising  
my forbearances  and endurance,  even declaring  that she would  
no longer  bear to live apart from me, that she has forgiven  all 
my misconducts  and that now I should  be sure to stop to see her 
on our way back.
There  is no allowance  today  for sharing  with you the tale of 
our return journey  home beginning  from the time when I 
re-joined  my compatriots  at the crest of the hill down to the 
time when  we arrived  back in our native  land. But this I think  
you ought  to make  a note of, that I stopped  briefly  in my wife ’s 
house at the River of Remembrance  where she welcomed  us 
and took me to see the elegant  splendours  and delights  of the 
place,  including  her own personal  riches.  Thereupon  she made  
a suggestion  that I return to meet her at the River of 
Remembrance  soon as we got back home  and gave our gifts to 
our king, to the end that we may thus be rejoined  together  and 
start off a new existence  of plenitude  and resplendence.
And precisely  this was what I did; when the few remaining  
hunters  and I returned  to our town, our king who by this time 
had advanced  in years was greatly  joyed,  he made  presents  of 
various  valuable  things  to us and we also handed  him the fruits  
which  we brought  with us - the fruit of Thought  and the fruit 
of Reliance-on-God.  These  concluded,  I headed  off to be with 
my wife.






My coming  here at this time to tell this tale to my friend here 
was our joint ideas, this beside the fact that my father before 
his death also left instruction  for me in this respect. Now 
friends, I give salutation  to everyone  of you, to even the last 
man among you. Herein comes the moment  when the owner of 
the house goes back home.
So did the man speak, and when he had paused thus, we 
saw him no more. But one wise head among the people who 
assembled  in my house to hear him said that his vanis^ng  gives 
him no surprise  whatsoever,  for the man and Akara-Ogun  were 
closely  alike, that he and the one who fathers  Born-Losers  were 
of like make.
The words therefore  are these, you children  of the world, in 
particular  you who are students  in places of learning,  and you 
who are their teachers  also. I render all of these things to your 
contemplations,  and leave all the rest with God our king and 
Creator. Even as you continue with your day-to-day  
perambulations  in your hves, I exhort you to make a close 
investigation  of all things, that you take special notice of those 
things that made those of by-gone times to stumble, that you 
keep also in mind the part which forbearance  plays in the lives 
of men, so that in so doing you also may come to be able to 
overcome  your own difficulties.  I will bring this book to a close 
right now, and may our God preserve  the lives of everyone  of 
you, I know that we shall have cause in days to come to hear news 
of one another.  Your home,s  thereon  will prosper,  your roads will 
yield goodness,  you will all hence make forward  leaps and not lag 
behind,  your possessions  will not know ruin, and for ever and ever 
shall you behold the good tidings of life.
176






GLOSSARY  OF YORUBA  WORDS
Ayedetu-eda— Prominent character, name 
suggestive  of dubiousness.
Ajayi 
agbada_ common  Yoruba  name.
— loose Yoruba leisure dress.
Akara-Ogun — same of first saga’s hero; 
morsel spells
amala — edible paste from yam flour.
Ajedubule — hero’s (Irinkerindo) father 
in-law
aluko — bird
aran — tough velvet material
Afeaye — name hinting at vanity and 
profligate  pleasures  of life.
Baba-onirun^bon-yeuke — old man with sweeping  beard.
bata — a set of traditional drums 
comprising  of a leader set with 
smattering sound and a base. 
It’s dance, very strenous,  invol­
ves the simultaneous  manipula­
a tion of two shoulders,  and legs.
in symmetrical  and assymmetri-
cal directions.
Danasungbo  ‘— man habitually setting bushes
; 53.4. on fire.
dandogo lu— formal Yoruba  wear.
dansiki — male top wear
egbe — a spell that is believed to give 
its user the abifity to travel in 
the air invisibly.
Esu — in Fagunwa ’s ‘ reworking of 
Christo-Yoruba  cosmogonic
myths, Esu is synonymous  with 
Satan but remains  as in the ac­
tual mythic structure  — the god 
of the cross-roads.
177






Elegbeje — Forest of a Thousand  and Four 
Hundred  Deities.
eko — corn mealie
ewedu — vegetable
Edidare — a dunce town.
Ewe-eye — suggests bearer to be a 
herbalist who brings much 
means to his profession.
etu — a handwoven smock, very 
formal
Eni-aye — One of the World, hero’s 
mother.
Ewadapo — literally repository  of beautiful 
attributes.
Elegbara — sub-human  semi-god  who 
wanders and inhabits the 
forests.
Filasayepo — man whose cap unites the 
world.
gari — dry cassava grain suitable for 
drinking  when soaked  in water.
gbere — tiny flesfa marks
Gongosu-takiti — fool with a gymnastic  bent.
Irinkerindo — hero, with a wandering  bent.
Ireke — Sugar, related to the melodious  
music he produces.
Inulayewa — a reflective,  wisely introverted  
man.
Ironu — thought.
ibante — traditional  apron, now out of 
use
Ibembe-olokunrun — rotund,  disease  prone man with 
insatiable  stomach.
Irunmale — Forest of a Thousand  
Daemons.
Iraniowo — Help.
178






Inakigori-ite— impostor ape sitting in a 
throne.
Ilaburu— Queen ’s Mother in town of 
dunces.
Kabiyesi  
Kumodiran  
Kako— praise  for a king.
— inherited  clubs.
— hero, much prominent  in 
Akara-Ogun ’s recount.
Kukute — career  wrestler  built like a tree ’s 
stump.
Langbodo— destination  town  for
Akara-Ogun ’s expedition.
moinmoin  
Oyindayepo— boiled  bean-cake.
— honey brings unity into earth;  
hero ’s father.
oriki — personal  praise chant, often a 
clan legacy.
Olojumajele  
oro— poisoned  eyes.
— a fearsome  masquerade  and 
cult.
Olohun-iyo — sonorous  vocalist,  member  of 
the Akara-Ogun  led
expedition.
ogede  
Ojuayedun  
Olugbode  
Olowolayemo— an incantatory  chant
— Yoruba  name
— Yoruba  name
_ vain type playing  to worldly  gal­
leries.
Olodumare
Olokun
Okanjuwafehinti— God
— lord of oceans
— greedy complacent  fellow  
leaning  back in a chair.
Osanyin  
oka 
sigidi  
sanyan— simulated  voice  of an oracle.
— yam flour paste.
— errand  spirit,  often  destructive.
— a formal  valued  dress
179






tira charmed  poiion  usually  encased  
in miniature  leatherwork.
togo 
yeri
180












Dapo Adeniyi  was born in November  1963. He attended  
Ijebu-Jesa  Grammar  School,  now in Osun State, Nigeria  and 
the University  of Ibadan  where he read Theatre  Arts and 
founded  a literary  magazine.  The River  Prawn.  His radio  play, , 
Helot  was broadcast  by BBC  African  Service  in 1986. He wrote  J 
the screen adaptation  for Soyinka ’s autobiographical  novel,^  
Ake: The Years of Childhood  and recently  completed  a fulk  
length  play, TIte Return  of Habibu  Timbuktu.  He. is currently  
Reviews  Editor  of the Daily  Times  of Nigeria,  Lagos.
The third in the series of the late Chief D. O. Fagunwa ’s 
classical  novels  IRINKERINDO  NINU  IGBO  ELEGBEJE  now 
translated  into the English  language  maintains  the former  theme  
of Quest and pattern  of narration  already  established  in his 
earlier  novels,  OGBOJU  ODE NINU  IGBO  1 RUNMALE  and 
IGBO  OLODUMARE.
The quest for meaning  and self-apprehension  drives  human  
heroes,  Yoruba  hunters,  to pay  the price  for communal  improve ­
ment i,nd for the attainment  of the ultimate  ‘thought ’ that is so 
necessary  for social advancement.  The obstacles  remain  the 
same:  much  hardship  and  a iong  distance  travel  across  Fagunwa ’s 
lofty  but now  familiar  fantastv  • forests.  Their  opponents  are those  
same  ghommids,  spirits  and elves:  non-human  yet nearly  human  
personae  who inhabit  D. O. Fagun  -'a’s world.  The human  char­
acters are above all mostly  related  to former  heroes:  Akara-  
Oogun,  Kako Oni-kumo-ekun,  Olohun-iyo  and even, Agbako.  
Mr Adeniyi ’s wonderful  translation  has adopted  a literary  style 
that retains  all the beauty  of the original  Yoruba  in a new linguis*  * 
tic atmosphere.  , ,
s-r ‘ .ISBN 978-136-102-4












