





In the Forest  
of
OlodumareTL-
SSA'-t
X 33 >
Wole  Soyinka
Nelson  Publishers  Limited






Published  by
Nelson  Publishers  Limited  
In association  with
Evans  Brothers  (Nigeria  Publishers)  Limited
JeriqhoRoad
P.M.B.5164
Ibadan
Nigeria.
E-mail: nelsonpublishers@yahoo.co.uk  
Tel: (02) 7516342;  8738897  
©Wole  Soyinka  2010
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication  may be 
reproduced,  stored  in a retrieval system,  or transmitted  in any 
form or by any means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  
recording  or otherwise,  without  the prior permission  of the 
Nelson Publishers  Limited.
First  published  2010.
ISBN  978-978-8197-41-6
Printed  by Printmarks,  along  Alomoja  Road,  Ibadan






PREFACE
The most famous  and enduring  of Fagunwa's  works, most  
readers  will agree, is OGBOJU  ODE NINU IGBO IRUNMALE,  
which I translated  nearly  fifty years ago as The Forest  of a 
Thousand  Daemons.  At that time, I had resolved  to translate  
nothing  less than  ALL of Fagunwa's  novels  and other  writings,  in 
order to make them accessible  to non-Yoruba  readers  both  
within and outside  the African continent.  Based on my 
translation,  there  have  been  others  into Italian  and French.
That raises  the obvious  question  - why has it taken  me 
nearly  half a century  to translate  another  of his works?  Afterall,  
the resolve  - and challenge  - continued  to hover  round  the 
lining of my skull, in between  my own literary  and other  
preoccupations.  Indeed,  together  with my then publisher,  the 
late Rex Collings,  I did make another  move  to obtain  further  
translation  rights  from his literary  executors  - I am no longer  
certain  which  work  was to have  been  my next  victim.  His estate  
however  created  some  difficulties,  not really  insurmountable,  
nothing we could  not have overcome  with some  will from my 
side but - truth will out! - my heart  was not fully in it, and I 
gladly  seized  on that excuse  to withdraw  from  the project.  The 
real inhibiting  factor for me however  was, and still is - 
Fagunwa  is not an easy writer to translate!  When  I set out to






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
subdue the OGBOJU  ODE with my self-assured  literary  
armoury,  it was to be a labour of love, a tribute  to a writer  on 
whose  verbal  pyrotechnics  my generation  had been  weaned,  
one who had also filled our youth with unforgettable  
characters  - Ogongo  Baba Eiye, Aramanda  Okunrin,  (the 
Wonder-Man of Contrary  Sensations),  Kako  Onikumo  Ekun  and 
his tragic  wife —pa mi nku s'ori  bembe  s'oko,  iyawo  Kako —such 
unforgettable  musicality,  yet an extract  from a blood-chilling  
denouement!
1 had even named  my first child Imodoye,  largely  from  
sheer  pleasure  in the mellifluous  name,  so deftly  married  to 
the mind's natural pursuit  - Knowledge  becomes  
understanding/  wisdom.  Fagunwa  was thus, in my regard,
■ extended  family. 1 thought  1 could  undertake  the translation  of 
his works  sleep-walking,  one hand tied behind  my back, the 
other  cradling  a frothing  calabash  of palm-wine!  Perhaps  in 
between  walks in the forest,  that home of imagination  and 
intuition,  incubator  of a strange,  possibly  pre-natal,  certainly  
instinctual  affinity  to the mysterious  in Nature  that Fagunwa's 
works  only served  to accentuate  within  me from childhood.  
Well, I learnt the hard way. After the unexpectedly  taxing  
experience  of struggling  through  that text, I came to the 
conclusion  that 1 had better  attend  to my own writing  - at least  
for some  time  - before  attempting  to tackle  another  product  
of that  master  of the Yoruba  language !
As can be guessed  from the foregoing,  I had become  
immersed  in Fagunwa's  works  at a young  age, and I know  that I






PREFACE
find myself  in good  company  when  I saythat  I still find OGBOJU  
ODE the truest expression  of his creative  originality  and 
inspiration.  His other works, including  this, are over  
sententious,  too preachy,  overloaded  with moralizing,  much  of 
it repetitious.  The reasons  for this tendency  however,  are 
worth  acknowledging,  it is useful  to remind  ourselves,  from  
time to time, of the educational  environment  that was the 
genesis  of such works  - including  the early  stage  works  of the 
itinerant  theatre  companies  that occasionally  relieved  the 
tedium of the performance  menu of missionary  schools,  
arpong  them the eclectic  dramaturgy  of Hubert Ogunde  
biblical resources,  anti-colonial  agitprop,  history,  Christian  
morality  tales, etc. etc. Fagunwa  was a product  of that 
remarkable  phase  in African  socio-cultural  transition.
Ours has been, from time immemorial,  a densely  
mythological  culture.  That cultural  source  now found itself  
bombarded  by the creative  resources  and values  of another,  
and in a most  imperious  way.  The Yoruba  cosmological  givens - 
with  their  educed  moralities-  had become  entangled  in others'  
confident  explications  of human existence  and purpose,  
transmitted,  most penetratingly,  through  incoming  religious  
literature  and iconic  representations  - and by iconic,  I refer  to 
pittorial  representations  of saints, angels,  demons,  heroes  
both  historic  and fictional,  kings  and queens,  and even  folkloric  
figures  in children's  narratives-fairies,  gnomes,  elves,  witches,  
goblins.  Jack and the Bean Stalk, Cinderella,  Pied Piper of 
Hamelin,  Tom Thumb,  Sleeping  Beauty,  Alice in Wonderland,






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
etc. etc. Such  fictional  mixed  baggage  of exoticism  and ethical  
intent  permeated  virtually  every  facet of literary  encounters,  
and was extremely  seductive  for its time. For those at the 
receiving  end, but of a creative/nationalist  bent, a new 
nourishment,  a retrieval  and recasting  of lost indigenous  
images and symbols,  including  the spiritual,  had to be 
undertaken.  The external  - in this case, largely  Christian  - 
frames  of reference  could not be abandoned,  least of all that 
'puritanic'  ethic that frowned  on the sheer pleasure  of the 
imagination  without  an accompanying  moral  extract.  Fiction  
had to be grounded  in moral purpose,  otherwise,  it was yet
another  distraction  game  of the devil.
Such  was the background  material  of Fagunwa's  literary  
and religious  education.  Fortunately  however,  he also drew  
inspiration  from archetypes  in the literature  of the Quest  - 
which  is common  to nearly  all cultures  we know of; man in 
search the very meaning  of existence,  man in search of 
wisdom,  man in search  of salvation  - personal  or communal  - 
man in search  of the philosopher's  stone  that  held  the key to all 
existential  conundrums,  but also  - Fagunwa  does  not frown  on 
the materialist-the  beckoning  and/or  deserving  of fathomless  
riches.  The moral purpose  however  earths  all outings.  Each  
protagonist  of Fagunwa's  novels- Akara-ogun,  Irinkerindo,  etc. 
became  localized  variations  on the theme of the pilgrim,  
Yoruba  John Bunyans  of PILGRIM'S  PROGRESS,  with some  
coloration  of co-opted  incidents  from other  literature  of The 
Quest  including  the Greek  classics.  A close  reading  also reveals






PREFACE
indebtedness  to the travails of deities from the Yoruba  
pantheon,  especially  of Orunmila  and  Obatala  whose  odysseys 
were never  without  rewards  in the acquisition  of knowledge  
arid wisdom,  with stressing  situations  that brought  out such 
vjrtues as patience,  stoicism,  and magnanimity  of spirit.  
Fagunwa  was quite open about  his mission  to impart  these  
virtues  to humanity.  His protagonists  - or else the figures  
e'bcountered  in their adventures  — have a constant  message 
for the black  race.  That  message  was invariably  bound  in ethical  
precepts  - this is what  accounts  for the compulsive  evangelist  
in;D,0.  Fagunwa,  a persona  that all too often  overwhelmed  the 
other  half-the  expansive  raconteur.
Fagunwa's  literary  Muse is perhaps  best understood  
through  the eponymous  name of one of his most dignified  
characters  - the earlier  named  Imodoye  - a Muse  that taxes  
those  she possesses  with  the mission  of improving  the moral  
outlook  of his fellow  men and women,  of imbuing  the black  
race with a sense of destiny.  Unlike  some of society's  loud 
political  mouthers,  Fagunwa  was the genuine  article,  a 'social  
critic'  before the expression  became  current,  resentful  of the 
warping  of traditional  mores,  the rise of a mimic  bourgeoisie  
with warped  values, the confusion  in the minds of the 
nouveaux-riches.  This made his moralizing  somewhat  
ambiguous,  since  he was clearly  not averse  from extolling  the 
goals (material  success)  of that class, as a mission  worth  
pursuing  in its own right. The reward  of each successful  
a/dventure  appeared  to be wealth,  infinite  riches.  Underlying






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Fagunwa's  purpose  however  was the impulse  to re-interpret,  
augment,  and hopefully  reconcile  the antecedent  world of 
traditional  values  of his Yoruba  world  with  Christian  teachings  
traditional  values  such as respect  of wives  for their husbands,  
of children  for their parents,  pupils for their teachers,  the 
individual  for the community.  Nearly  every  encounter,  every  
episode  in his protagonists'  adventures  is tuned to the 
cadences  of such value extraction,  if not in the action  itself,  
then in the depiction  of one character  or another,  sometimes
simply  through  the strategy  of character  contrasts.
Well,  so much  for a reminder  of what  Fagunwa  tried  to 
achieve  through  his riveting  tales  of encounters  with the iwin,  
ebora,  anjonnu,  and other  forms  of abami  eda, for whom  1 
invented  the generic  word 'ghommid'  in my translation  of 
OGBOJU  ODE, a neologism  that I have also carried  into IGBO  
OLODUMARE,  in order  to preserve  some  continuity. Faced  with 
the same  problem  as I was when  he undertook  the translation  
of IRINKERINDO  NINU  IGBO  ELEGBEJE  rendered  as EXPEDITION  
TO THE MOUNTAIN  OF THOUGHT  - another  labour of love to 
which  1 am delighted  to draw  attention  - Dapo  Adeniyi,  1 was 
gratified  to note,  has also adopted  the tradition  of what  I called  
'inventive  naming ceremonies'  in order to find English 
equivalents  for the inhabitants  of Fagunwa's  physical  universe,  
most of whom are unknown  to the English and other
languages.  • . u- u i
Fagunwa's  relevance  continues  in a manner  in which,
feel certain,  even he had never directly  intended.  Trapped






n
PREFACE
within  a modem,  urban  environment  - at least  one that passes  
for such - one is moved  to ask whether  the creatures  we 
encounter  today, most especially  in the rarefied  zones of 
power, charged  with governance,  administration,  business,
^ ^^dsnimunity  security,  education,  etc. etc. are representatives  of 
the upward  evolution  of social man, or are closer to the 
dwellers  of llu obun  - (City  of Filth) both moral  and physical - 
wJth unprepossessing,  often sadistic  or retarded  characters  
such 9S the Agbako,  Ijamba,  Ojola-ibinu,  Dongisola,  Ibanuje-  
isale, etc. of his creations.  Indeed,  the question  that  confronts  
us today is whether  or not Fagunwa's  protagonists  such as 
Akana-ogun,  Olowo-aiye,  Imodoye,  etc. would not find 
themselves  even more imperiled  in today  s supposedly  
developed  and modernized  Nigerian  cities  than  in those  forests  
of animal  and supernatural  violence,  spiritual  void and evil 
e'mt)odiments  into which  he cast his heroes  for their life-and-  
death  struggles,  deploying  each  conflict  to inject  in his readers  
a,longingfor  a modicum  of morality,  decency,  rational dealing,  
moderation,  selflessness  and sense  of community.
"'In short,  in looking  at society  today,  can one fail to see 
correlations  with Fagunwa's  fantasy  world,  and to such an 
i extent  that  one is moved  to ask: which  is the  Jungle,  and which  
* isthe  human  habitation?  As one who roamsthe  forests  quite  a 
bit myself,  cocooned  therapeutically  in the tranquility  and 
order  of Nature,  its intrinsic  laws and logic of renewal,  I am 
often-moved  to ask: which  one signifies  progress  and which  the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
State  of raw primitivism  of the most  dispiriting  retrogression?
Yes, predatoriness  is also a law of the jungle,  but it is a 
predatory  pattern  that is organic  to the principle  of sustenance  
and replacement,  decay  and renewal,  not material  lust that 
today expresses  itself in kidnapping  innocents  - incloding  
school  children  and octogenarians  - for ransom.  Animals  kill 
only for food. Among supposedly  cultivated  humanoids,  
contentment  is not even found in 'making  a killing'  on the 
market  in frenzied  accumulation',  but literally,  kidnapping  and 
butchering their  victims for their 'vital organs'  as essential  for 
money  making  rituals  and pursuit  of political  power.  The  jungle  
law of supply  and demand  has become  so diversified  that mini­
markets  exist that specialize  in the sale of human  spare  parts.  
The clientele  include  supposedly  educated  men and women,  
yet so mentally  regressed  that they believe  that a spoonful  of 
powdered  human  liver or thumb,  mixed  with their  akamu, is 
certain  to make  them  millionaires  between  one market  day  and 
the next or guarantee  their  party nomination  for governorship  
or a senate  seat.  Do Fagunwa's  markets  of sinister  commodities  
located  in forests  of primordial  evil appear  out of this world?  At 
least they do not pretend  to be churches,  mosques  or shrines  
or places of spiritual  gathering  into which  our adventurers  can 
be lured in a false sense  of security,  in today's  real life, there  
appears  to be no space left that is honoured  as a place of 
universal  sanctuary.  Fagunwa's  literature  may be heavy on 
moralizations,  but the creations  with which  he has 'peopled'  
his forested  universe  provoke  some human and social






PREFACE
paradigms  that question  the entire theory  of the upward  
evolution  of the human  race - or, in fairness  to others  - 
specifically  of its local representatives,  and of present  times.
^, Yes, Fagunwa  literally  bludgeons  his readers  with moral  
pfecepts,  oppressive  and self-indulgent  but, can one truthfully  
acfcuse  him of failing  to have extracted  those  moralities,  or the 
lack of them,  from social  observations,  some  of which  are, as 
earlier admitted,  disturbingly  immediate?  Unrelieved  
negative  portrayals  tend to blunt the edge of credulity,  the 
result  of flat, two-dimensional  fictional  representations,  like 
souls  of pitch  darkness  without  even  the occasional  glimmer  of 
light. And yet, and yet... can one truthfully  swear  to never  
having  met, in one's  own social  interactions,  beings  that  appear  
to be accurate  reifications  of the basest depravities?  1 confess  
myself  to have  been  startled,  arrested  in mid-stride  on arrival  at 
certain  passages  during my translation  of IGBO OLODUMARE-  
it was as if Fagunwa  had been looking  into the future,  
cautioning  against  the dangers  to society  through  political  
carelessness  that results in malevolent  occupation  of 
leadership  positions.  The ability to administer  a shock of 
recognition  is the hallmark  of the unsparing  eye in a writer.  It 
would not be claiming  too much to say that a number  of 
Fagunwa's  countrymen  and women  would  experience  instant  
flashes of recognition  in encountering  certain character  
depictions  or patterns  of conduct.  Here follows  my favourite,  
but firs^the  setting:






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Olowo-aiye,  hero of that novel,  in company  of one of 
Fagunwa's  comically  named but ponderously  sententious  
spokesmen,  Onirugbon-yeuke,  is visiting  the home  of Death,  
Iku. There,  our adventurer  encounters  seven  types  of humanity  
who are guests  of Death.  All of them,  except  one, are there  by 
compulsion,  undergoing  different  degrees  of torment  for 
infractions  and worse  committed  on earth. These  crimes  that 
vary from  careless,  self-inflicted termination  of own existence  
to crimes  against  others,  some  of which  can be categorized  as 
crimes  against  humanity,  as represented  by the seventh.  That  
seventh  archetype  is not merely  undergoing  torments  but is 
being  subjected  to systematic  and horrendous  torture,  cold­
bloodedly  administered  by their host, Iku. Here now is Iku s 
explanation  for the seeming  sadism  being inflicted  on this
seventh  individual,  a summary  of his career  on earth:
A worthless  individual  is the seventh,  he is not among  
those  who set out to improve  the world but rather  to 
cause distress  to its inhabitants.  It was through  
manipulations  that he attained  a high position.  Having  
achieved  this however,  he constantly  blocked  the 
progress  of those behind him, this being a most  
deplorable  act in the eyes of God, and rank behaviour  in 
the judgment  of the dwellers  of heaven  - that anyone  
who has enjoyed  upliftment  in life should  seek to b.e an 
obstacle  for those  who follow  him. This man forgot  the 
beings  of earth,  forgot the beings  of heaven,  in turn, he 
forgot  the presence  of God. The worst  kind of behavior  
agitated  his hands  - greed occupied  the centre  of his






PREFACE
j heart, and he was a creature  that  walked  in darkness.  This
man wallowed  in bribery,  he was chairman  of the circle  of 
scheming,  head of the gang of double-dealing,  field-  
marshal  of those  who crept about  in the dark of night.
With his mouth,  he ruined  the work  of others,  while  he 
used a big potsherd  to cover  the good  works  of some,  that 
others  might  not see their  attainments.  He nosed  around  
for secrets  that would  entrap  his companions,  and blew  
them  up into monumental  crimes  in the eyes  of the world.
He who  turns  the world  upside  down,  places  the deceitful  
on the throne, casts  the truthful  down  - because  such  is a 
being  of base earth,  he will never  stand  as equal  among  
the uplifted.
Such passages  in themselves  are straightforward,  even  
if the subject  matter,  being unmitigated  by any saving  grace, 
may be said to serve  the cause  of homily  more  than literature  - 
that is, until recollection  of real-life  models  for Fagunwa's 
unblinking  portraitures,  tempers  one's instinctive  plaint  
against  the hyperbolic.  However,  in the overall  context,  even  
Such avoidance  presentations  -flee  at first  sighting!  - appear  
to struggle  through  a contradictory  moral-aesthetic  universe,  
filled with ambiguities.  Such terrain  is singular  to Fagunwa's 
imagination  - that is creative  privilege  - and an assessment  of 
Its literary  conviction  would  require  a treatise  by itself. One 
suspects  however  that this is what confers  originality  on his 
fiction, ’ despite  obvious,  indeed sometimes  blatant,  
derivations.  To return  briefly  to our dread  host,  Iku, one of the 
seven  tenants  of his punishment  ante-room  is actually  not a






prisoner  at all but a voluntary  visitor  come to recharge  his 
batteries  - as it were  - in that macabre  abode.  Let Iku himself
introduce  this guest:
Those  whom  you have seen in this abode  of mine, the 
good Lord passed  them  on to me - one of them  does not 
actually  live here,  he is only  on a visit  today,  for his home  is 
in the outskirts  of heaven.  However,  the remaining  six are 
ail mine. God ordered  me to use them as examples  to 
mortals  whenever  they happen  to come  into my purlieu.
(The  exception)  was indeed  aged  before  he left the world.
He committed  no evil, he bore no falsehood,  he did not 
soil the name  of any of his companions,  he participated  in 
no plot against  anyone,  did not visit the medicineman  in 
order  to ruin the fortunes  of another.  He never  boasted,
'what  can God do to me?' He never  swore  falsely,  did not 
steal,  never  disrespected  his elders,  indeed  he committed  
no evil whatsoever.
One is intrigued  by the presence  of this exception,  and 
the seemingly  obvious  answer  - that Fagunwa  simply  wants  to 
interject  a contrast  - is not totally  satisfying.  It does  not appear  
to be in character.  Is this where  such a gentle  soul in prior  
existence  would  choose  for a vacation?  Not the choice  you or I 
would  make  for a change  of air! Or for a sabbatical.  Olowo-aiye  
our aesthetic  'Everyman'  in this context  is appalled.  He cannot  
wait  to get out of there  for some  fresh  air and even indulges  in 
outright  deception  to enable  him begin a stealthy  dialogue  
with his legs.  One cannot  but sympathize  with  Olowo-aiye.






PREFACE
The moral  ambiguities  posed  by Fagunwa  are even more  
troubling,  and nowhere  is this more  openly  demonstrated  than  
in the very  trajectory  of Olowo-aiye,  both narrator  and hero  of 
our story. Even the name  by itself  spells  not only approval  of, 
but outright  celebration  of wealth,  materialism,  a shade  of 
ostentation  that is further  sealed  by the outcome  of the hero's  
adventures  - unlimited,  inexhaustible  wealth,  thanks  to the 
discovery  of the magic  egg within  the stomach  of Ojola-ibinu  
who,  slain after  one of the bloodiest  battles  that have  emerged  
from the pen of the master  of Yoruba  narrative.  It is not 
suffjcient  to claim that the 'egg of plenty'  is the goal and/or  
reward  at the end of the 'Quest'  epic  across  many  cultures.  It is 
dimply  that Fagunwa  is nothing  if not the great moralist,  the 
extpller  of virtues  and chastiser  of vanities.  Greed,  avarice,  lust 
for material  things,  all come  under his stern,  often  repetitious  
disapprobation,  yet time and time again,  it is evident  that the 
stressing  of the human  spirit  takes  second  place,  and indeed  
serves  as mere  prelude  to prosperity.
The matter  is stranger  still when  one comes  to the past 
and present  conduct  of both  the principal  figures  of the Quest  
and their  associates.  The case  of Ajediran,  the lovely  consort  of 
our main protagonist,  Olowo-aiye,  strikes  one with fearsome  
force.  This is her own autobiography,  straight  from her own 
mouth,  and her sister's;
We moved  out to seek  those  very  witchcraft  powers  and 
we succeeded,  and in that mood  did we begin  our career






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
of witchery  that has endured  till today...  Listen,  man of 
courage,  when my sister  and I became  witches,  we dipped  
the eyes of people  in adversity.  We dined  on nonentities  
and we dined on the powerful,  we killed even the 
important  of the community.
Now  this is the woman  whom  Olowo-aiye  quite  happily  
wooed, married,  and cherished  and one who loved  him in turn,  
as if the same author  had not impressed  on us, in his earlier  
work  OGBOJU ODE,  the perils  of marrying  a woman  deep  dyed  
in witchcraft  powers.  Does  Fagunwa,  even by mere  suggestion,  
cast a censorious  eye on Ajediran's  past? Not at all, everything  
is presented  with apparent  normality,  nothing  out of the 
ordinary.  But wait a minute,  what drove  the woman  to such 
excesses?  Let us now  return  to what  preceded  this confession;  
One day, resulting  from a domestic  quarrel,  members  of 
the household  began to lie against  us, accusing  us of 
killing  off their  children.  The truth however  is that at this 
time we had no such witches'  powers,  a label which  
people  had no right to stick on us. Before  three months  
had passed,  all the townspeople  up the hill and down  the 
valley had come to believe  that my sister and I were  
indeed  witches.  Is this how imbecilic  the people  of this 
world are? If two or three people  make a declaration,  
others  no longer  have their own thoughts,  they must  
disseminate  something  that their eyes have not 
witnessed?  Thus  did the people  foist on my sister  and 1 a 
name  that  we did not  deserve.






PREFACE
Here we discern  Fagunwa's  comparative  moral  voice:  a 
disgust  with community's  lazy moralities  which  fasten  on mere  
rumour  in order  to rush to negative,  injurious Judgment,  the 
consequence  of which  is to turn the innocent and upright  into 
vengeful  monsters.  No question  whatsoever,  many  victims  of 
such injustice  will look on the two sisters with some  
understanding,  even if they do not condone  their  subsequent  
career  of vengeance.  People deserve  whatever  comes  to them  
when  they  initiate  a project  of calumny-thus  implies  Fagunwa  - 
and responsibility  for the misconduct  of the falsely  accused  is 
placed squarely  on slanderers,  not on the victim turned  
avenger.  Fagunwa's  target,  let us remember,  is constantly-the  
community,  its failings  and path  to redemption.  In this case,  he 
targets  the corrosive  power of mere gossip, its ability to 
undermine  society  and reduce  the collective  intelligence  of its 
members.  When  Fagunwa  focuses  on individuals,  he writes  of 
them  in an archetypal  or representative  framework,  rendered  
most elaborately  and summatively  in that sermonic  scene  of 
j Hell's  inhabitants  where  Iku himself  plays  tourist  guide,  taking  
I our hero  through  the illustrious  careers  of his unwilling  guests,  
nowundertorture.
A footnote  on that  guided  tour  of Iku's  torture  chamber  
sums  up Fagunwa's  humanistic  signature.  Having  piled on the 
horrors  - depicted  as no more than just deserts  - and 
overwhelmed  the tolerance  level of humane  sensibilities,  he 
then recoils,  using  Olowo-aiye  as the touchstone  of a humane  
I response.  It is interesting  that this is the scene in which an






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
element  of comic  confrontation  - between Olowo-aiye  and his 
ponderous  host Onirugbon-yeuke  - is actually  played up. 
Olowo-aiye's  rebellion  is at once comic,  almost  child-like,  but 
he remains  stubborn  in his resolve not to re-visit Iku. 
Onirugbon-yeuke  is patient,  understanding,  even paternalistic  
but insistent.  This confrontation  enables  Fagunwa  to moralize,  
yet protest-  it strikes  me - against  the Christian  theology  of the 
place  of Hell in after-life  as a place  of unrelieved  torment  for 
sinning  humanity.  Excess,  which  Fagunwa's moral  compass has 
steadily  denounced  in mortals  as one of the deadliest  of sins, is 
craftily  positioned  as equally  deserving  of condemnation  in 
immortals  in after-life.
There is yet hope for those of us who find ourselves  
shunted  into  Iku's  sadistic  ante-room !
Wole  Soyinka 
Abeokuta,  Sept 2010
The translation  of this book  was faciiitated  by Chams  Pic, 
and distributed  by The Lumina  Foundation.






CONTENT
ENTER  OLOWO-AIYE .............................................................. 3
OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE.......................... 13
THE FIGHT AT THE ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE ............... 44
THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE FOREST  
OF OLODUMARE:  GONGOSO! ........................................... 75
THE SECOND  DAY WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,
WHO LIVED  ON THE ROCK  PROMONTORY ........................110
THE THIRD  DAY WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,
WHO LIVES  ON THE ROCK  PROMONTORY .......................... 129
LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE FURRY-BEARDED-ONE  WHOSE  
DWELLING  IS ON THE PROMONTORY  OF ROCKS ............... 179
THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING OF ALL THE WORLD'S  
REPTILES .............................................................. 195












PARTI
THE NARRATION  OF AKARA-OGUN
ON
OLOWO-AIYE'S  JOURNEY  
TO
THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
i






—MM- ■PTWT-^






ENTER  OLOWO-AIYE
Ofie bright  afternoon  a long while past, after I had 
lunched,  I left my home,  strolled  outside  the fence  of 
my compound  and climbed  on a huge  rock.  Arrived  at 
the top, I sat in the shade of a tree that covered  the rock,  
perched  like the lord of all he surveyed,  even as the sun beat  
down  relentlessly  and humanity heated  up like the pot of yam 
flour, sweat  oozing  from every  human  pore, so that the only 
relief could come  from dousing  oneself  in coid water. Even I 
*tos'§ed  off my clothing,  leaving  only my shorts  to cover my 
buttocks.  1 who had earlier  donned  a cloth cap, cocked  its 
pdOch stylishly  over the forehead,  was forced to toss the 
covering  from  my skull. Now  the breeze  of well-being  caressed 
my occiput,  but the afternoon  reddened  intensely;  even  
farmers  had fled from  their  farms,  reduced  to giggling  in their  
hide-outs.  Porters  lost their power  of speech,  they could  only 
wheeze  as if at the end of a steep  climb,  eyes  were  hardened  as 
Storte,  tree  stumps  were  hard  as knobs,  the earth  burned  red as 
pd"lm oil, trouser hems were  bleached  white  while  the sleeves 
•oftheogbodoshimmered  red. I had nothing  but pity  for drivers  
aS'they  were  covered  with dust and grime,  just like foliage  on 
th§ roadside,  while  the passengers  seated  at the back of the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
lorry,  found themselves  unwilling  wearers  of cosmetic  powder  
they shared  the colour  of brick  walls. Dust was the cover  of 
humanity  all over. Countless  were the ones who knew the 
malice  of the sun. Lizards  were restless,  their skin crinkling  
stridently  over dry leaves,  birds  were  silent.  I have known  the 
cooing  of the dove,  heard  the cry of the cuckoo,  listened  to the 
camwood  bird chatting,  I tell you, each one of them fell 
impenetrably  silent  wherever their Maker  had assigned  them  
on that day. Only  the minnows  of the air, the alapandede,  fjew 
ceaselessly  hither and thither,  restless  as leaves on water  
surface,  hopping  from  tree  to tree  and chirping  like chickens.
For my part, I simply sat tranquil,  gazing  on the face of 
the earth,  thinking  on the children  of men,  for I have  cohabited  
with all sorts in my life. The time we speak  of was a most  
significant  phase  of my existence,  for it was  th^n  that my father  
closed  his eyes for ever, when  he crossed  to the other  side of 
the river,  bade  the world  good-bye,  when  the cock  crowed  the 
departure  of a man. It was a loss that reached  into my bones,  
for my father  was not an ordinary  being  among  men.  He and his 
wife loved each other,  they set a good example  for us their  
offspring:  I, Adeyemi,  Ojuolape,  and Omotunde.  Racheal  
Osunyomi  who was my mother  was a woman  who loved her 
husband  and loved  children,  so much  empathy was lodged  in 
the eye sockets  of my mother.  My mother  still lives, but my 
father  is no more,  and this absence  of my  father  never  ceases  to 
give me pain. For he did that  for me which a father  does  for his






ENTER  OLOWO-AIYE
children,  and I also endeavoured  my uttermost  to ensure  that 
.he knew  that I treasured  this. It was such weighty  matters  that 
occupied  my mind, how, if my father  had not died so early, I 
would  have repaid  his care. For even if one is attired  only in 
tattered  clothing,  if one could only saunter  out in borrowed  
clothes, as long  as we do not forget  out begetter,  the good  Lord 
would also not cast us out of his mind. However,  even as I 
pandered  these  matters,  the plan of the Almighty  differed  from  
mipe,  and He is of course wiser  than I. Thus  it pleased  him that 
one morning,  a messenger  came  from home  to inform  me that 
4Tiy father  had gone  into the other  world.  Grief  bowed  my head 
to the ground,  my body  heated  up like a pot on fire, my stomach  
was in turmoil  as when  the wind  disturbs  the branches  of the 
forests  and I was weary of the world  like the rags on a beggar, 
and heaven  appeared  as desirable  as gold in my mind.
These  were  the thoughts  that coursed  through  my mind  
that plain afternoon  after  I had left home,  when  I perched  like 
an outcrop  on the face of the rock.
. Little  did I suspect  even as I sat that  there  was someone  
lurking  in a little bush beside  me, settled  down  in my solitude,  
gazing outwards,  in total disregard  of the copses that 
surrounded  me. Had I known  different,  I would  have headed  in 
a ^different  direction,  chosen a spot that was safe from  
discovery.  For I needed  some  reflection  at this time  and did not 
wish any interruption.  For a time of play deserves  its space,  a 
timeTor  fighting  is meant  for fighting,  the time for weeping  is






when one weeps,  the time for rejoicing  calls for rejoicing.  
Whoever  sets out for a community  gathering  and is girded  in 
the loincloth  of the hunter  has clearly  carried  his sacrifice  
beyond  the crossroads.  I wanted  to reflect  at this very time,  
and did not take kindly  to disturbance  from  anyone.
However,  like it or not, this man imposed  his presence  
on me. I was  furious,  my face was contorted  by a frown  like the 
face of a starving  man, I sucked  in breath as one in pain,  
tightened  my lips like a house  servant  who has just dropped  
valuable  crockery  and dares not confess  but drags himself  
along one wall after another,  his stomach  churning  like the 
mottled  froth  at the mouth  of a keg of palm  wine.
When  this stranger  greeted  me, I returned  his greeting  
with some  courtesy  but why?  Because  I did not want  to plead  
guilty  to excess,  did not wish to earn a bad reputation,  giving  
people  an excuse  to say that one is not of wise  disposition.  This 
was what  made  me court  the goodwill  of the world  of opinion  
for, I must  confess, my greeting  did not proceed  from  the heart.
That  greeting  conceded,  I began to behave  in a manner  
that would  make  him depart  in annoyance.  I remained.silent,  
said nothing.  He spoke,  I did not smile.  I rose from my perch  
and descended  to the base of the rock, nor did I bother  to 
excuse  myself  as one should.  When  I returned,  I found  he had 
not budged,  so I resumed  my seat without  a word to him, 
without  so much as a glance  in his direction.  I hummed,  I 
whistled,  and did not offer  him a seat.  What  I found  aggravating






E/\fT£ROLOWO-AIYEi
hdwever  was to be compelled  to watch this man take his 
buttocks  to the ground  right  next  to me, his body  against  mine  
d'S'when  a child clings  to his mother.  I said to myself,  matters  
hSve  truly  come  to a head!  I fled disturbance  at home  only  to 
ehCounter  trouble  on a rock; I loaded  a morsel  beyond  the 
rhouth's  capacity;  I tried  to eat my boiled  rice with a bean  cake,  
tried  to transform  yam  flour  into paste  with  cold  water;  offered  
a'white  man  ebato  eat!
Even as I considered  this situation,  the man himself  let 
out'-a  totally  unexpected  cry. His voice  was as one might  expect  
fro'fn a querulous  servant  who  throws  down the burden  of his 
assignment  from a great height.  Fright  took hold of me as it 
tldfes  the heart of a wife whose  husband  sets off to war, and I 
felt disorientated  like a faulty  motor-cycle  attempting  to climb  
uphill. For this man's  voice  was like  a lion's  roar, it penetrated  
earth  like that  of an elephant  and reverberated  round  the bush  
just'as  when  the railway  train  approaches  its station  and blows  
on its klaxon.  This caused  me to scrutinize  the intruder  more  
carefully  and, lo and behold,  it was none other than my 
erstwhile  friend,  that man among  men,  Akara-ogun,  he with a 
life-and-death  commitment  to his stomach,  the same who 
ITattled  the wild Agbako  in the Forest  of a Thousand  Demons,  
jdtirneyed  to Mount  Langbodo  and back, he who visited  me 
th‘at other  time with the tales of his adventures  that earned  
him renown  throughout  the land.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
He looked  at me and burst  into laughter.  I returned  his 
look and laughter  erupted  from my mouth.  We embraced.  In 
my view, he did not appear  to have aged,  but his gun seemed  
darker  than before,  it shone  like the kijipa cloth  of a truly  aged 
owner,  one that had been purchased  .before  my mother  was 
espoused  to my father,  dyed and beaten  a million  times  over  
and thus  taken  on the dark  deep  gloss  of antiquity.  And  Akara-  
ogun's  cap had always  held a special  attraction:  when he 
loaded  it with matches  and tobacco  and slung  it over  the back  
of his head,  it resembled  a clump  of fruits  on a tree. At other  
times when he swaggered  past, having chosen  to lob it 
forwards,  it looked  more like a decorated  walking stick.  When  
he raked it sideways  over the ear, it was transformed  into a 
gourd  hanging  from  a palm  tree.
And now I cried, 'Akara-ogun!',  to which  he chortled,  
'Indeed,  It is I'. Again  1 called  out, 'Akara-ogun,'  and he replied,  
'It is I indeed,  so let out what is on your mind.'  A third time 1 
saluted,  'Akara-ogun'  and he burst  into laughter.  He hit himself  
on the chest and declared  with unabashed  boastfulness,  
'Akara-ogun'  yes-that  is my name.  I bear  a name  of substance,  
this praise-name  I have acquired  is one that suits me, it is the 
course that befits  me that I pursue  all over. I am your  friend  of 
many  years,  and my powers  remain  undiminished. The bones  
remain  sound  in the body of this man. Dig into your pocket,  
perhaps  the tools of your trade are conveniently  lodged  in 
there.  Today,  the crook  of the drum  will reverberate,  for 1 have






ENTER  OLOWO-AIYE
aTnessage  to impart  to the children  of earth  through  you,  great  
issues  are lodged  in my skull and great  lessons  in my forehead.  
Therefore  I implore  you in the name  of the black  race, stretch  
yourself  out on this rock, let us use it as a desk. I shall stand  in 
aS chairman  and you as the scribe,  while the leaves  of the 
forest  remain  in place  like members  of this union.'
When  I heard  these  words,  I was indeed  excited,  rather  
like one standing  trial with the risk of imprisonment  but finds  
himself  acquitted  and set free. For I had stumbled  on that 
which  I inwardly  craved,  encountered  a visitor  of my longing.  
God had buttered  my bread  and so, without  further  ado, I dug 
into my pockets  and extracted  writing  material.  I stretched  
myself  out on the rock and began  to carry  out the mission  of 
mV trade.
Akara-ogun  eased himself  to the ground  beside  me, 
and began  to speak  in the accents  of the hunter.
'indeed I am Akara-ogun.  My father was a great  
herbalist  and Ifa diviner.  Herbs and charms  filled our home  
from  doorway  to ceiling,  even as unearthly  potencies  lurked  in 
the nooks and crannies  of rooms. Medications  filled the 
rafters, and all forms of protection  littered the family  
compound.  Epileptics  found  cure  at the hands  of my father,  the 
guinea-worm  afflicted  were  equally  healed.  Numberless  were  
lepers  who became  elites of society  after treatment  in our 
home. My father  punished  small-pox,  humiliated  glandular  
ailments,  ruined  the very  name  of rheumatism,  stomach  pains
m ■






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
were turned  to ancient  fables,  headaches  were reduced  to 
infancy,  backaches  were rendered  speechless,  coughs  went  
into hiding, chest diseases  took to their heels, dysentery  
turned  mute,  fever  walked  with regrets,  skin rashes  sobbed,  
dysentery  hung  its head,  skin yaws  lamented,  sores  hissed,  skin 
diseases  frowned,  chills took to self-pity,  the lunatic  woman  
turned  fashion  model,  male lunatic  resumed  shaving,  the 
pregnant  delivered  with ease, the mother  walked  with joy, 
sorcerers  bowed,  witches  asked forgiveness,  all forces of 
darkness  paid obeisance  before  my father.
'My dear  friend,  even as I narrated  that other  time,  my 
mother  was a true seasoned  witch.  She flew in broad  daylight,  
she flew at night, it was a human  skull that she used as a 
drinking  cup. My mother  had accompanied  her corn meal  with 
the arm of a child,  garnished  her rice with  the thigh  of an adult,  
she had used  the cheek  of a hefty  man  for her  gari.
'The  story  of how  my father  came  to marry  my mother  is 
worth  telling,  for I have never  revealed  this part of the story  
before,  and yet what  an engrossing  tale it is! There  is nothing  of 
my father's  life that I do not know,  and he was one man whose  
feet did not grow  weeds  on the ground  while  he lived.  Even as 
he roasted  yam in the embers,  his eyes had already  begun  to 
seek the stew, and while he lived he ceaselessly  impressed  
upon  us this counsel:
' "A man who sets out early to burden  his mind with 
woman  matter  will never  matter  in his life. A woman  who  sets






ENTER  OLOWO-AIYE
out early to burden  her mind with man matter  will never  
r^atter  in life. A man who,  when  it is time  to wed,  takes  woman  
matter  seriously  will definitely  become  important  for life. A 
woman  who, when it is time to wed, takes man matter  
^tjously  will definitely  become  importantfor  life. Agossipof  a 
man who marries  a gossip  of a woman  has made  gossip  the 
centre  of his mind and will never  amount  to much in life. A 
gossip  of a woman  who marries  a gossip  of a man has planted  
gossip  in the centre  of her heart  and will amount  to little in life. 
A worthy  man who marries  a gossip  of a woman  but does not 
plant  gossip  at the centre  of his mind  will attain  worthiness  in 
life. A worthy  woman  who marries  a gossip  of a man but does  
not plant gossip  in the centre  of her mind will remain  worthy  
for life. Any worthy  being  who plants  the important  matter  of 
another  in the prime place of his or her mind will remain  
worthy  for life."
'In this manner  did our father  advise  us in our youth,  
whenever  we sat at his feet, enjoying  his company.  Even as I 
speak  to you, this very moment  my friend,  it is with difficulty  
that 1 restrain  tears from forming  in my eyes as I recall him, 
Olowo-aiye,  a man of great beauty.  But it will not be until 
tomorrow  that I shall narrate  the full story of my father.  The 
former  adventures  that I told to you,  tales  that  you set down  for 
others  to read - those  were  tales of my own life. 1 then spoke  
briefly  of my father's  own adventures.  Therefore,  my friend,  
rise from  your  prostrate  position  on this hard rock,  do not begin






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
to incur chest pains. 1 know your house, 1 shall visit you 
tomorrow,  and when  I return,  it will be to continue  the life story  
of my father.  Till tomorrow  then.  May  God grant  us a reunion  in
goodness.'
Thus  did the man speak,  and 1 saw him no more.  Quickly,
1 also rose from the rock and found my way home. The 
following  morning, after  I had breakfasted  on fried bean  paste  
and cold corn pap, and taken  my seat in comfort,  I sa\NAkara-  
ogun  emerge  suddenly  before  me like a ghommid.  His cap was 
cocked  forward  in one of his accustomed  styles,  hooked  onto  
his forehead  like the beak  of a bird.






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO 
IGBO  OLODUMARE
The instant  I saw Akara-ogun,  I knew  that heavy  work  
had indeed  begun.  I turned  to my wife and said, 'Dear  
wife,  the Dread  Visitation  is upon  us.'
She replied calmly, 'There is no Dread Visitation  
anywhere,  my dear husband.  Gird yourself.  The King of Heaven  
will assist  you. I know  your  tasks  are many  but work  exists  to be 
dealt with. I shall take care of the home and smooth  your  
passage,  and I shall prepare  exceptional  food  for the passage  of 
the throat.'
When  my wife responded  in these  words,  I also replied,  
'I thankyou  for this exhortation  it is only  to be expected  of you!
I shall proceed  with the labour, I, the man, make this 
declaration.  You carryon  with  your  work  and I with mine.  There  
is manhood  in me even as there  is womanhood  in you.  We shall 
demonstrate  the delights  of this home  to our  guest.'
The industrious  have respect  in the eyes of the world,  
but the shirker  is mere emptiness  in the eyes of women.  I 
entered  the house,  gathered  up the instruments  of my trade,  
set a chair  beside  a table,  then  set another  facing  it: on this, my 
friend,  Akara-ogun,  the man wedded  to food to the gates of 
death, took his seat and, without  further preliminaries.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
plunged  straight  into his story:
'Know,  my dear  friend,  that  it was in his twenty-fifth  year 
on earth  that my father  prepared  one morning  to venture  into a 
singular  forest  near our town to hunt, a forest  known  to our 
townspeople  as Igbo Olodumare,  the Forest  of the Lord of All 
Deities,  for it was a forest  that commanded  fear in mortals.  
Hunters  themselves  were terrified  of this forest  even more  
than they were of the Forest  of a Thousand  Daemons,  and it 
was a law in the town that no hunter  who had yet to kill an 
elephant  should  venture  within it. This forest  was the very 
home of marvels  there the birds speak in human  voices,  
animals  run markets  of their own, a variety  of trees have no 
roots,  yet their  trunks  remain  cool to the touch  and  their  leaves 
display  a dazzling  glaze.  The mice  are bigger  than  the rats,  snails  
bigger  than the tortoise  in the Forest  of the Lord of All Deities.  
The powerful  bog-trolls  and aggressive  ghommids  are close 
friends while bothersome  serpents  of all kinds terrorize  
hunters,  for in that forest also reigns  the Head of ail living  
reptiles,  whose  name  is Python-of-Rage.
'Before  my father  left home, he had lived true to a 
hunter's  calling.  Numerous  charms  circled  his waist,  and rings  
of supernatural  powers  weighed  down upon his fingers.  Six 
cows  were  slaughtered  as sacrifice  for his departure.  My father  
summoned  the herbalists  of the town and fed them, even 
though  our home was filled with protective  charms  passed 
down  from  generation  to generation.  For  six full months  he had






s
OLOWO-AtYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
run from pillar to post on account  of this mission  to Igbo 
Olodumare,  for those who had ventured  in never returned,  
they  were  simply  passed  from  the hands  of one forest  denizen  
to another's.  Ah, a most  meticulous man was my  father.  There  
are men who simply  surpass  other  men - Olowo-aiye  was a 
colossus  of a man. The day my father  girded  himself  for that 
hunt, when it came to parting  company  with all kinds of 
relations,  it was an earthquake  impact  upon the household.  
The herbalists  were  gathered  in our inner  chambers.  All kinds  
of people  milled  around  the backyard,  the elephant  hunters  
congregated  in the front  porch,  goats chased one another  past 
the wicker-gate,  women  wept,  men wept,  the socialites  could  
not speak,  the city slickers  wore heavy  faces. However,  my 
Tather  togged  out himself like a soldier  in a white  man's  army, 
wrapped  himself in charms  like a healer,  walked  like one who 
was set on a war-to-finish,  stood at attention  like a police  
recruit  paraded  before  his superior  officer.
'When  the hour arrived  for him to take his leave, he 
summoned  the entire  household  together,  guests  and all, and 
addressed  them  thus:
' "The day is upon us when I, must go where  men of 
valour  go, to the domain  of abnormal  beings,  to where  all is still 
a.dark  mystery  to me. I must  leave  well-being  behind,  enter  the 
tiome  of turbulence,  but hardship  is the father  of success,  a 
good name  is to be preferred to a new wife, and if I endure  all 
hardship  today,  I shall certainly  gain treasures  the day after. If I
i






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
return  from the Forest  of the Lord of all Deities  with joy, my 
name  shall endure  on earth  imperishably.  My dear  people  one 
and all, never  aim at minor  goals in your endeavours,  always  
chase  what  is sizable.  He who targets  the great  things,  even if 
he does  not attain  his goal,  will at least  move  close  to the large  
things  of life, but he who  only  sets  his sights  on the minor  things  
will never  stand  within  the assembly  of the mighty.  Whoever  
prays  to own ten dandogo  may not obtain  all ten, buteightyhe  
who prays  for six pairs  of trousers  may obtain only  five, but he 
who asks for only one pair of trousers  from God, if he obtains  
two in the end, let him give thanks  to the King of Heavens.
' "Truly, I see your looks are downcast,  whereas  my 
heart is as hard as stone glinting  in the stream.  However,  
progress  is out of reach  for the hesitant,  and I am anything  but 
that as I set out on my way. With the aid of my Creator,  it is 
certain  that I shall return  to you. The hesitant  thinks  of his 
death  in the mornirtg  and dies in the afternoon,  whereas  he still 
had three  more  days upon  earth. One's  mind  is the counsellor  
of one's  existence.  So, give me leave  to depart,  take back my 
good  wishes  to your  homes,  take  care  of all I leave  behind.  Man 
goes  forth.  Spread the news  that  the powerful  goes  where  the 
powerful  will- be found,  the man of note goes where  men of 
note are found.  Let it not be heard  from notables,  from  young  
and old, that wayfarers  to the Forest  of the Lord of Heavens 
never  return,  let all the gentle people  of the world  continue  to






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
expect  the return  of the man  of the Mask  of Dares/'
'With  these  words,  Olowo-aiye  set his face  on the road 
to Igbo Olodumare,  his eyes transformed  in his head and 
turned  red as embers.  Such was his haste  to be-gone  that he 
even forgot a most important  fortification  which was in a 
gourdlet,  yet, without  this, he would  find it difficult  to even  find 
the way to the Forest.  The feathers  of the woodcock,  the 
feathers  of camwood  bird, of the vulture,  and the head plume  
of the parrot  were used  to stuff  the neck  of the gourdlet,  while  
blood  from various  sources  were smeared  on its sides.  It once  
belonged  to my grandfather  who  found it inside  the stomach  of 
a python,  for it must be recalled  that even before  we were  
born,  several  generations  had been hunters  within  our family.  
The patriarch  of whom I speak  was the first to hunt in the 
depths  of Igbo  Olodumare  throughout  the land  it was then  that 
he dispatched  the python  and found  the strange  object  in its 
belly. One only had to utter the appropriate  incantation  and 
name  his destination,  and instantly  a breeze  would  blow and 
ruffle  the feathers  in the desired  direction.  Look, my friend,  if 
my memory  did not fail me, I would  recite  that incantation  this 
very moment, for they  are not more  than  twenty-five  phrases, 
and once that was done, I would  go and look for that potent  
gourd.
'The Forest  of Olodumare  is indeed  far, requiring  at least  
a.journey  of two days, no less. The route  is pocked  with deep  
gullies.  Broad rivers also criss-cross  the terrain,  rumbling  as






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
they cascade  down  rocks.  It is lush with  vegetation  both good  
and bad, and there  are countless  thorned  bushes to impede a 
man's  progress  while  all kinds  of mean-spirited  shrubs  tangle  
with troublesome  roots and weigh down branches,  raining  
their  rubbish  on the wayfarer's  head.  The animals  give one no 
respite,  the orangutangs,  gorillas  and their  relations  and other  
long-tailed  simians  leaping  from  tree to tree,  their  faces  close 
to humans'  as are the fingers  on their hands.  Truly do those  
monkeys  resemble  humans,  as if the Creator  did intend  that 
they be the relations  of human  beings.  There  are numerous  
species  in those  forest  depths.  Trees  as tall as the palm tree,  
wrapped  around  by thick parasites,  home to huge animals.  
Birds  with  sharp-pointed  beaks  they  never  strayed  too far from  
the crown  of palms  lest they  miss  the kernels  that  sustain  them,  
just as squirrels  did not stay too far from roots. Ribbon-like  
snakes  constantly  sought  the recesses;  the mamba  sought  the 
undergrowth,  the python  made a home near the streams,  
while numberless  venomous  snakes  sought  the sanctuary  of 
holes.  Snails  preferred  the cool,  moist  places,  the tortoise  loved  
the earth-mounds,  the brown  hopper  skipped  between  the 
shrubs while the pigeon sought rarer heights  that bird 
functions  like the cockerel  of the forest  depths,  signalling  to 
hunters  the time of day, Trees  a long time  fallen  have no more  
vitality,  and mushrooms  now grew upon them.  The eyes of 
each animal  differed  from  another,  the path of the rodent  was 
straight  and smooth  while  that of the wild boar  was broad  and






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
sumptuous.  My good friend,  seeing  beggars  all description.  
You know  already  the numerous  kinds  of peril  that reside  in the 
forest  even so were my father's  encounters  on his way to the 
Forestof  0/ocfumore.  Nonetheless  and it is I who  assert  this all 
I have recounted  so far amounts  to nothing  when compared  
with  what  beset  him when  he finally  reached  destination.
'My father  slept by the road the first day he left home,  
and by the afternoon  of the following  day, he was quite  close  to 
destination.  By three  o'clock  he arrived  at a small forest  that 
was neighbour  to Igbo Olodumare,  this forest  being  known  as 
Igbo Idakeroro,  the Forest of Impenetrable  Silence this 
qualifying  as the most soundless  place you could find 
anywhere  under  the sun. Only  one ghommid  lived  in this  forest,  
and he was more  fiery than the very lightning  of the sky. The 
ghommid  did not permit  anyone  to enter Igbo Olodumare,  
placing  in the way of hunters  all manner  of onerous  tasks,  yet 
he was no higher  than the measure  of two feet,  this creature  
who lived in an outsize  ant-hill.  A most aggressive  being,  he 
moved  around  with  a load  of whips  every  day  of his existence.
'When  my father  entered  this forest,  every  object was 
wrapped  in total  silence.  The leaves  on the trees  were  drooped,  
not one rubbed  against  another.  It was  as if no breeze  whatever  
stirred  the air. The boughs  were equally  motionless,  just like 
soldiers  before  their superior.  Roots appeared  listless,  like 
patients,  animals  had abandoned  the place  as abode  and birds  
flown elsewhere  to seek more congenial  habitation.  Every






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
living  thing  took  on the appearance  of a debtor  weighed  down  
by his liabilities, the entire  forest  was eerily  silent as if a major  
bereavement  had befallen  both friends  and society.  Look at 
me, my friend,  seeing  that my father  found  himself  alone  with 
this dimunitive  kobold  in the forest  fastness,  his passage  was 
clearly  not meantto  be easy.
'After  my father  had wandered  aimlessly  for a while,  he 
and this tir\y kobold finally set eyes upon each other. A 
memorable  day it was: danger  met with trouble,  succubus  
confronted  incubus,  two lions  looked  each  other  in the eye.  The 
name of this creature  was Esu-kekere-ode,  Tiny Fiend of the 
Border. He wore neither  smock nor trousers,  he neither  
sported  a cap nor wore a loincloth,  deploying  only leaves  to 
cover his genital  region.  He had only one eye, and that was 
mounted on his head like a full moon.  There  was no nose  to his 
face, but his eye extended  beyond  the border  of his mouth and 
was flat like the palm of the hand.  His teeth  were  similar  to a* 
lion's,  stained  red as when  the lion has just fed on raw meat.  
Hair covered  him in place of clothing,  his entire body was 
shaggy  like a vvhite man's dog, and a huge lump seemed  
embedded  at the top of his head.  Even as he carried  his load of 
whips  on his shoulder,  so was a huge  sack tied round  his neck, 
and that put terror  in the beholder,  for the sack  was  thoroughly  
saturated  with blood with the down of birds stuck to it. 
Medicine  gourdlets  and dried ato shrubs,  snake spines,  the 
feathers  of the woodcock  and shrub  hopper,  animal  horns  large






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
and small,  includingthose  ofthe  striped  deer  which  loves  to eat 
okra on the farm,  and feathers  ofthe  bush  fowl  that  walks  in the 
bush - all these  were like outer  garments  on the monstrous  
sack of this tiny kobold  of the forest  ravine,  he whose  name  is 
Esu-kekere-ode.
'As he approached,  his legs kept up a tintinnabulation  
from  snail shells which  had been broken  into little pieces,.each 
piece  as solid as a shilling  coin, strung  together  like beads  and 
worn  on his legs packed  solid  from  ankle  to knee.  Just as dense  
were the metallic  rings that turned  his fingers  black as the 
fingers  of a dye-maker.  Ah, take it from me, a most  malevolent  
creature  was this ghommid ofthe  forest  ravine,  known  as Esu- 
kekere-ode.
'When  my father  appeared  from this direction,  and the 
other  from the further,  the pair stood  still and surveyed  each  
other,  for when  elephant  meets  elephant,  certain  it is that  trees  
will topple  on one another.  He walked  inwards,  my father  
walked  outwards,  and when  it lacked  only a short  distance  for 
them to meet,  they stood still once more and surveyed»each 
other the inevitable  was poised  to begin. Esu-kekere  was  the 
first  to speak:
is ' "Who  are you?  What  are you?  What  are you worth?  Of 
what are you made?  How are you rated?  What  do you seek?  
What  do yoiiJwant?^hat  are you looking  at? What  do you see?  
What's  in your head? What  ails you? Where  are you from?  
Where  are you headed?  Where  do you call home?  What  earth






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
do you tread answer  me! Son of mortals,  answer  me in one 
word! Surely  you have courted  trouble  this day, you have 
climbed  the tree beyond  its branches,  you have fallen  from a 
great  height  into a well,  you have  heedlessly  swallowed  poison,  
you saw an overcrowded  farm yet proceeded  to plant  
groundnuts  in it! You untutored  man, you know  that the lion 
and the antelope  cannot  set eyes on each other, that the 
leopard  and cattle  can never  be friends,  even as the day when  
the cat gli mpses  a mouse  is the day  the mouse's  existence  ends.  
You saw me, I saw you, I approached,  you approached,  you did 
not commence  a rapid dialogue  with, your legs, rather  you 
swaggered  towards  me in total disrespect.  You mean  you are 
not struck  with  fear?  Your  heart  did not leap  out in fright?  Have  
you never  heard  of me? Never  heard  people  speak  of me?  The 
skulls  of those  greater  than you have served  me for a cooking  
pot,  their  bones  littering  the corner  of my room,  the rib cages  of 
such  unteachable  ones  serve  as stools  within  my house.
' "I am the tiny kobold  of the forest  ravine  whose  name  is 
Esu-kekere-ode.  A disagreement  took between  me and 
another  being  at the gates of heaven  and it led to my being  
accused  of maligning  the King of Heaven.  This grew into a 
conspiracy  with others,  and they  all insisted  that 1 be expelled  
from the,precincts  of heaven.  I left that place and came to 
reside  beneath  the heavens  where  I have remained  a hundred  
years  among  the dead  who  are quartered  in the lower  regions.  1 
learnt  all kinds  of wisdom  from  them  and from  then  on, I came






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
to understand  that, among  the deaths  that overtal<e  the 
children  of earth,  only a few could be attributed  to the will of 
heaven. It is mortals themselves  who bring death on 
themselves.  Foolishness  sometimes  takes  its toll unexpectedly;  
excess  kills others  without  notice;  laziness  accounts  for others;  
greed kills a number  of them.  Sometimes  it is the hypocrite  
who seeks  ways of ending  the lives of others  but instead,  it is 
the would-be  murderer  who ends up on the porch  of heaven. 
Again, the treacherous  friend seeks ways of finishing  off a 
friend  but it is he who is pushed  beyond  existence.  Sometimes  
the rich seek the end of the poor but the former  ends up on 
heaven's  terraces.  The little man would  seek the death  of the 
important  but finds  himself  on the other  side of existence. The 
careless  talker  plays  with death;  the prodigal  plays  with death,  
the arrogant  plays  with  death;  the conspirator  plays  with death.  
And why does  this persist?  Because  the Creator  recompenses  
his creations  by the measure  of their works, and the 
aimlessness  of the living among  their kind. Thus the Creator  
canTiot  fail to use the rewards  of their  own conduct  on them,  
especially  the reverses  of life, either  on the outskirts  of earth  or 
of heaven.
' "I am the tiny kobold  of the forest  fastness,  known  as 
Esu-kekere-ode.  When  I left the dwelling  of the dead,  I came  to 
thie Forest  of Idakeroro  where  I turned  the ant-hill  into my 
home.  In this  jungle  I encountered  animals,  here I encountered  
birds, here I met ghommids  but all of them I chased  out so






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
thoroughly  that today  I cannot  find any being  with whom  to 
cohabit,  leaving  me the sole occupant,  feeding  on the leaves  of 
the forest.  However,  this day, coming  upon  you unexpectedly,  I 
give  thanks,  the luck  of my head  has brought  a gift  to me, for it is 
a long while  since I tasted  the meat  of humans.  When  I have 
slaughtered  you, I shall enjoy  your meat  for three  full days. I 
shall use your  head  to season  okra stew,  your  chest  will swim  in 
vegetable  stew,  and your  buttocks  will ooze  fat into my pepper  
stew.  The rest  will be preserved  in my home,  stocked  in my ant­
hill larder.  Ah, I give thanks  to Olodumare  on this day, I give 
thanks  to all daemons  this day, I give  thanks  to all ghommids  on 
earth,  give  thanks  to the provider  amulet  in my pouch,  even  as I 
thank  the all-powerful  ghommid,  Alade-Igbo,  the kobold  who 
administers  the ant-hills  of the ravine,  and who  also happens  to 
be a relation."
'Thus did this ghommid  address  my father, and my 
father responded  even as it befits one strong man in his 
dealings  with another.  He regarded  Esu-kekere-ode  as a 
cantankerous  woman  looks  at her husband  with daggers in  her 
eyes:
' "Whoever  uses a sieve to gather rainfall merely  
deludes  himself.  He who stands  in the path of a railway  train  
will find himself  in the other  world.  The aged one who spies  a 
snake  and does not flee is seeking  his death.  Any animal  who






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
thinks little of the hunter  will sleep behind the hearth.  
Whoever  counts  on inheritance  has already  sold himself  into 
penury.  Any kobold  who belittles  me will wander  from heaven  
to heaven  it is I who  make  the boast-1  say to you,  all the kobold  
of Igbo  Olodumare,  that  when  the Creator  had fashioned  ail the 
objects  on this earth,  it was the human  whom  he made  lord of 
them  all. I want  you to know  this day  that  pride  is the beginning  
of destruction,  it is the beginning  of a fall, it is against  the laws 
of mankind  and contrary  to the designs  of the King of Heaven. 
Rather  than  you making  a meal  of me, I am poised  to make  your  
flesh  dinner  for the beasts  of the forests  and the birds  flying  in 
the trees.  True,  you have grown  accustomed  to turning  those  
you have met into the contents  of the soup pot. Nonetheless,  
Esu-kekere-ode,  do not forget  that one fowl is bigger  than  
another,  one goat supersedes  another,  one bird surpasses  the 
next,  one man is sturdier  than another  and no two hunters  are 
the same. It is I who says to you, I am mightier  than those  
others,  I do not belong  in their ranks,  I am the equal of their  
fathers  and you,  tiny kobold  of the Jungle,  you are nothing  but a 
mouthy  creature,  you, Esu-kekere-ode,  I am not the playmate  
of your  mother's  mother.  To hell with  you,  what  are you worth?  
To hell with you seven  times over! Matters  come  to a head  
today, prepare,  let us measure  our strengths  against  each 
other."
'My dear  friend,  hardly  had my father  finished  speaking  
than  the two  grappled  with each  other,  and - what  a Rumble in






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
the Jungle!  A human  confronts  a ghommid?  The entire  forest  
was in uproar.  Tough  as Esu-kekere  was, just as tough  was my 
father,  Olowo-aiye,  man among  men, who engages  in a no- 
holds-barred  with a creature  from  the other  world.  When  the 
fight  first began,  Esu-kekere  endeavoured  to grab my father  by 
the waist  and slam  his back  onto  a thorned  tree, lift his leg onto  
his shoulder,  toss him among  fallen leaves,  then begin to 
torment  him.  This however  proved  difficult  to achieve,  for even  
as he plotted  this, my father  had other  ideas in  mind. His plan 
was to seize  Esu-kekere  by the shoulders,  lift the short  creature  
from  the ground  completely,  twirl the knuckle-head  overhead  
and fling  him a long distance,  letting  Esu-kekere  fly from  sky to 
lieaven.  However,  this also proved  easier  said than done,  for 
while one had girded himself  like a lion, the othen had 
mustered  himself  like an elephant,  no wonder  the thick  dust of 
combat  rose  to the heavens.  The ground  began  to shudder,  the 
stamp of feet of both combatants  exceeded  that of ten 
humans.  Their eyes bulged  to bursting,  they grappled  with 
each other  as parasites  grip the trunk  of a tree, each panting  
like a hunter's  dog. That was indeed  a red-letter  day for the 
kobold  of the ravine,  the creature  known  as Esu-kekere-ode.
'After  a while,  this vicious  ghommid  leapt on my father  
at waist  level,  and as my father  strove  to seize  him by the leg, he 
leapt on his shoulder,  and when  he had squeezed  my father  at 
the throat,  he gave him a resounding  slap. That infuriated  my 
father,  and he began to push the kobold  forwards  until he






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
reached  a thorned  tree and, with all his energy,  pinned  Esu- 
kekere  to the tree. The creature  screamed  but jumped  off to 
the ground.  My father  was then able to seize him by both  
ankles  to the extent  that  he lifted  him above  his head,  but when  
he hurled  him with all the strength  of his fury, in the.hope  of 
smashing  his head  completely,  matters  did not quite  follow  the 
script.  When  my father  looked  in front  of him,  this creature  was 
standing  as if at attention,  laughing,  regarding  my father  in a 
way  that  said the battle  is just beginning.
'My father  was now becoming  weary of the stalemate.  
He thrust  his hand in his pouch,  seeking  some  combat  charm.  
His hands  closed  on a flute that had come to him through  
generations.  He blew on it and the sound roiled round the 
entire neighbourhood.  He raised the pipe to a tune which  
proclaimed  that since  the King of Heaven  is the architect  of all 
•victories,  the owner  of all things  on earth and in heaven,  being  
present  in the seas  and in the air, there  is nothing  impossiblefor  
Him.  Whatever  he wishes  will be done,  and no one can prevent  
him from raising  anyone  to the heights.  A pretender  cannot  
prevent  God from lifting high whomsoever  he pleases.  My 
father  piped  further:  the pretender  sets out in the morning,  
black  as the soap from plantain  leaves  of the stream,  by noon  
tie is as brittle  as firewood,  by evening  he has been totally  
.consumed  by fire. The conspirator  said to his friends  that he 
'was fully covered  in cloth, but when  the truthful  arrived,  he 
(revealed  that he was stark naked.  Thus and thus chanted  my






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
father  with deep feeling  on that day when he and the tiny 
kobold  of the ravine  met  face  to face.
'The song echoed  throughout  the forest,  and his flute  
was more  mellifluous  than  that  of the king.  What  else  to expect  
when the song was a soulful plea it could not help but 
penetrate  the hidden  recesses  of the mind  of this kobold.  The 
creature  hung  his head like the leaves  of the plantain,  he stared  
atthe  ground  in mental  turmoil  and spoke:
' "The children  of man have changed,  the wise have 
gained  admission  to their  souls.  It has been  a long  while  since  I 
chose  this place as my abode,  but no one has ever tried to 
convert  me from my ways. Yet have I observed,  since the 
Creator  chos4  to bring me to life, that the patient  can never  
have regrets,  unless  those among  them who let foolishness  
ruin their  virtue  of patience.  Enough.  From  now  on, I shall  bear  
no further  malice towards  the children  of this earth. My 
attitude  to them  shall cease  to be hostile,  I shall stop  frowning  
at animals,  and I shall not violate  the leaves of the forest.  Your  
words  that turned  my heart  towards  repentance.  However,  I 
must  not leave  you with the notion  that it is mere ploy of the 
exhausted  that extracts  these  words  from  me if you do, it can 
only mean  that you have failed  to understand  anything.  Thus  
you would  have  proved  yourself  to be one who  calls  the goat  a 
cow,  who  calls  a motor  car a bicycle,  and who  sees  this  world  as 
the heavenly  abode.  The patient  is confronted  with a fight  and 
side-steps  it, the foolish  thinks  he is simply  a coward,  but when






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
the patient  begins  to fight,  all the foolish  begin  to topple  over 
like trees.  I thankyou  for this dirge,  it is a dirge  of the wise  and it 
reminded  me of He who is my Creator.  Without  this song,  you 
and I would  have fought  on for three  solid days, for I am no 
stranger  to fights  of such lengths.  I have  fought  for six months,  I 
have  fought  for three,  and I have  fought  a fight  that lasted  one 
full year  solid yes, even  this I, whose  name  is Esu-kekere-ode"
'Thus  spoke this kobold,  and my father's  rage subsided.  
He and Esu-kekere  exchanged  salutations,  they shook  hands 
and each turned  his face in the direction  of their  destinations.  
However,  as is only to be expected,  a fight does not end 
without  injuries  to one, right  or wrong.  My father  had collided  
with trees, his hunting  sack was torn, he lost a most vital 
charm,  and his tobacco  pipe was broken.  Even so had Esu- 
kekere  sustain  injuries.  He lost two of his teeth,  one of his rings 
was broken,  he broke  a leg and now walked  like one with ring­
worm  on his feet. This is why the wise consider  fights like a 
poison  and avoid it constantly,  for a brawl is not befitting  for 
humans,  it being  more like a fish-bone  in the throat.  But the 
demented  of human  society  light the torch of the white  man 
and begin  to lookfor  wars  outside  their  own city boundaries.
'Olowo-aiye  set his face on his road, he and his Maker, 
and it lacked  only  a little  time  for him to pass  through  the Valley  
of Silence  when he arrived  at a small sparkling  stream  that 
flowed  nearby,  and was extremely  cool.  There  my father  rested






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
and washed  himself,  after which he snacked  off some red 
banana,  took a kola nut from his pouch  and bit a slice into his 
mouth.  His mind  now  settled  into a deep  calm like  a debtor  who 
owed six pounds',  only to have his Maker  come  to his rescue 
with a boost of ten pounds  that found its. way into his 
possession.
'He had left the cool stream  no longer  than  ten minutes  
when  he arrived  at another  place  which  was spread  wide  and 
flat. The leaves of this place were cool and glossy, more  
beautiful  than the front lawn of the white man, and small  
shrubs proliferated  more abundantly  than the huge trees.  
However,  the trees  which  stood  among  the shrubs  were  truly  
impressive,  they stood tall and proud, some white, others  
black, the bark  on others  were  the colours  of the rainbow;  with 
stripes  of black and red. The approach  was wide, stretchihg  
beyond  sight,  which  is to say that  the road  which  my father  now 
trod simply  grew  wider  and wider. Huge  stones  were  lined on 
either  side of the road, behind  them were small trees which  
cast their shaded on this avenue, lush with incredibly  
entrancing  flowers.  My dear friend,  death  that strikes  before  
our eyes is merely  alerting  us with the proverbial  - when  
Olowo-aiye<  saw these things, he knew indeed that Igbo 
Olodumarewas  nearby,  and he began  to tighten  his trousers.
'The wise and the foolish  seem  indistinguishable  when  
all is well, but the wise become  clearly  separated  in a time of 
adversity  - my father acted the wise at this moment.  He






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
carefully  placed  his possessions  on the ground,  moved  under  
one of the trees  and prostrated  himself  before  God,  saying;
' "You, King of Heaven  who is my maker,  you. King of 
Heaven  who created  Igbo Olodumare,  you the Being of 
Marvels  who  created  all things  of marvel.  Creator  who made  all 
the hunters  of the living  world,  the time  has come  when  I must  
pray that you remain  my strength  in this venture.  There  are 
those  in this world  who, when  they departed  the world,  took  
their names with them, these are the ones who passed  
through  this world  as if a reptile  slithered  across  a rock  surface,  
leaving  no footprints.  There  are those who entered this  world  
and, on leaving,  left behind  them detestable  names,  these  
ones are like dark stains  on white  clothing  . The washerman  
scrubbed  hard to remove  the stains until the fabric nearly  
turned  to rags but the stain remained  indelible.  I pray  you, my 
Creator,  let me not be like these.  I ask you in all humility  that 
you act on the goodness  of your  heart,  that 1 may be like those  
who came  into this world  and shone  like the moon  that does 
such good from generation  to generation.  Their names  
endured  after  their passage,  and those  who came  after  them  
labour  hard so that they mfght  emulate  their lives. Even as I 
proceed,  let me return  as a man of solidity,  so much so that 
even if the time  has come  for my departure  from  this  world,  the 
living  would  ask of one another,  'could  this have been a mere  
mortal?"






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'Olowo-aiye  prayed no more than this. The King of 
Heaven  heard  him from the other  side, for just as there  is no 
mortal  akin to the angels,  there  is no rock of reliance  like the 
King  of Heaven.  My father  braced  himself  and surged  forwards,  
singing,  whistling,  treading  earth  like a true  warrior.
'Not long after, gazing  forward,  he saw two women.
* coming  along the path, chatting  and laughing)  displaying
roadside  wares  as is the occupation  of hundreds  of women.  
These  two women  conducted  themselves  as if they had left 
home and were enjoying  themselves  in the woods,  acting  
coquettish  as if they  were  in the middle  of the town.  One was 
light-complexioned,  buxom  and tall, struck  one as a woman  
I who had already  entered  the marital  home,  while  the other
' was not that generously  endowed,  was only^ of moderate
^ i! height,  with a dark skin, her teeth  white  as the grains  of new
harvested  corn. Both were beautiful.  The tone of .their  voices
1 sounded  like that of socialites  while their gait was like that
a’ which  the enjoyment  of life had turned  carefree.
'When  they met my father,  she greeted  them  and they  
also responded  as one would expect  from strangers,  after  
which my father  proceeded  on his way and they on theirs.  
However,  how these  two society  ladies  found  themselves  in 
the forest  depths  could not fail to astonish  anyone.  This was 
what  made  my father  turn round  to take another  look  at them;  
and it was at this very moment  that  the shorter  of the two also
I
} _____






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE  j
looked  back, and when  the two pairs of eyes  met, they both  
broke into laughter,  then resumed  their walk. And the next 
time  that my father  turned  round  again?  Once  agaih  each pair 
of eyes leveled  off at the other,  and let be it recalled  that my 
father  was yet tied to a woman,  he was a bachelor.  And now 
followed  the third time when  my father  looked  back and the 
woman  did iikewise!  He laughed,  and so did the woman,  her 
teeth gleaming  like a whitewashed  wall. Olowo-aiye,  turned  
the back  of his head on Igbo Olodumare,  my father  went  after  
the woman'  may  the good  Lord save the children  of the world  
from trouble  laden women,  those who wear their head-tie  
slanted  forward.
'When  my father  approached  the woman, she stopped,  
while  the other  walked  on some  distance  before  stopping.  She 
stood  apart,  for when  a man and a woman wish to engage  in a 
delicate  exchange,  a third  is simplynn  their  way. Regard  me well,  
my good friend, take exceeding  care in your life, if you 
accompany  your friend to the home of courtship,  think  
'Carefully  before  you interfere  in their discussion,  or yod will 
‘appear  like a blemish  on white clothing.  Even if their faces 
•laugh with you, they will not fail to say privately,  "That  
Mnsensitive  one did not’allow  us to enjoy  our intimacy."
‘ 'When  my father  stood  face  to face with  the woman,  he 
^greeted  her' "Is all well at home?  I hope  you are in good  health.  
I hope  there  is nothing  the matter."  And the other  replied  with






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE  .
encouraging  courtesy.  After this exchange,  the woman,  still 
smiling,  said, "It strikes me that I have met you before,  
somewhere."  My father replied, "Indeed,  that has also 
occurred  to'me.  Isn't  your  home  behind  ourown  compound?"  
True enough,  there was a blacksmith's  home behind our 
compound  where  a witchery-potent  woman once  lived before  
Olowo-aiye  began  his hunter's  wanderlust,  but it was quite  a 
while  since  my father  last saw  this woman.  Little  did one know  
that the woman  had left home,  she and her elder  sister,  and 
had turned  Igbo Olodumare  into their  place of dwelling.  It was 
only  when  my father  enquired that  the affair  now began  to be 
unravelled.  She replied:
' "True  it is, I am the woman  whose  name  is Ajediran,  
once residing  near the home of the blacksmith.  One day, 
resulting  from  a domestic quarrel,  members  of the household  
began  to lie against  us, accusing  us of killing  off their  children.  
The truth  howe,ver is that at this time  we had no such witches'  
powers,  a label  yvhich  people  had no right  to stick  on us. Before  
three  months  had passed,  all the townspeople  up the hill and 
down the valley  had come  to believe  that my sister  and I were  
indeed  witches.  Is this how imbecilic the people  of this world  
are? If two or three people  make a declaration,  others  no 
longer have,their  own thoughts,  they must disseminate  
something  that their eyes have not witnessed?  Thus did the 
people  foist  on my sister  and I a name  that  we did not deserve.
' "To cut a long story short, we were enraged.  We






OLOWO-AIYE  GOBS  TO IGBO OLODUMARB
moved out to seek those very witchcraft  powers  and we 
succeeded;  and in that mood did we begin our career of 
witchery  that has endured  till today.  So many  in this world  are 
like the stumps  on one's  path which  constitute  an impediment  
to the progress  of the children  of Olodumare.  One who never  
committed  the crime of lying is accused  of lying; until the 
innocent  accused  resolves  within herself  that; since others  
insist  on giving  her a name  she does not deserve;  she might  as 
well behave  true to expectation.  This is one important  part of 
the failings  of those  beings  that  the Creator  has scattered  over 
the surface  of the earth.
•' "Listen;  man of courage;  when  my sister  and I became 
witcheS;  we dipped  the eyes of people  in adversity.  We dined  
on nonentities  and we dined  on the powerful;  we killed even 
the important  of the community.  In the end; our conduct  
angered  the King of Heaven;  since  even if the truth is that the 
children  of earth acted  in a foolish  way; we had also responded  
by conducting  ourselves  like ilaburu,  the ancestor  of the 
monkey.
' "One early morning;  a deep-dyed  veteran  of a witch  
sealed  us up in the house;  she was far more potently  versed  
than we; a venomous  being  who took the battle  to us then  
chased  us out of our home  into Igbo Olodumare.  I shall never  
forget  this event  till the end of my dayS; because;  but for this 
affair; I would have found a husband  by now. Therefore;  I 
implore  yoU; you handsome  being; do not regard me as






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
shameless  on account  of my next enquiry.  I want you to 
remember  that  the backward  tradition  of our people  does  not 
permit  a woman  to choose  a man whom  she desires  in her 
heart,  it is men who have the right to first tell a woman  that 
they want her in marriage.  If a wdman  craves a man for 
husband,  to say it out becomes  a burden  on the tongue of the 
woman.  This conduct  punishes  one half of humanity,  yet if the 
man sees a snake  but the woman  kills it, it is not regarded  as 
offending  the law. Countless  are those  who say that a terrible  
choice  is a woman  who herself  picks a man for husband,  yet 
before  a woman  does  this, the fiame  of love in the recesses  of 
her heart  has become  more  powerful  than  the fire of a kiln. Not 
to beat  around  the bush,  you man of valour,  you are not among  
the multitude.  You please  me intensely,  I want  you to be my 
husband.  I want  to be your wife,  that together  we shall enter  
the home,  and together  saunter  out."
'Pay  heed,  my friend,  the surprise  of this narrative  is that 
the delightful  words  from the lips of this woman  caused  my 
father  to taste  love  for the first  time in his life. Love  covered  his 
eyes  like the froth  on the neck  of a wine-  gourd.  Olowo-aiye,  on 
account  of beauty,  forgot  character,  on account  of shiny  eyes,  
forgot  wisdom,  on account  of white  teeth  accepted  to espouse  
a witch,  ft was from that day that my father  loaded  his back  
with  the trouble  that  he would  come  to name  - woman  trouble.
'They  did not actually  become  man and wife until  three






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
months  later, but once their minds  were made  up, my father  
slung  his hunting  sack  over  his shoulder,  placed  his machete  in 
its sheath  and headed  back  towards  Igbo  Olodumare,  followed  
by his wife-to-be.  Together  with  the elder  sister,  she fell in step 
with him. It was the King  of the Forest  that  would perform  this 
wedding  in the end, but you shall hear  how  this came about in 
due course.
'When these two women  followed  him, they had 
assumed  that they would  all shortly  turn back, little did they  
know  that Olowo-aiye  was on his way to hunt in the Forest.  
When  they had walked  around  for some time, the woman  
asked,  "Where  exactly  are you headed?"  My father  replied,  
"Igbo  Olodumare."  She then enquired  further,  "To do what?"  
and my father  replied,  "I'm going  hunting."  Then the woman  
asked,  "On what  do you place  so much  confidence?"  To this my 
father  made  response,  'I rely on my gun, I rely on my machete,  
on my charms  and spells and I rely on God Almighty.'  The 
woman  followed  up by asking,  "Have  you ever  been  inside  this 
Forest?"  "No,"  admitted  my father,  "but I have heard  of.it." It 
was  at this point  that  the elder  woman  joined  in, saying:
' "Son of man, Igbo Olodumare  Is a most dangerous  
forest, it is the abode  of danger,  a place  of sorrow.  If you do not 
take extreme  care, you will regret  your venturing,  but if you 
take my counsel  to heart,  you will acquire  a great  name  in the 
future.  Many  have  gone  there  never  to return,  but since  your  
Creator  has directed  your  feet in our direction,  you shall return






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
safely  a§ long  as you abide  by our advice.
' "Even  before  you enter  the forest,  I already  entertain  
fear  of the guardian  of the gateway,  for a most  deadly  ghommid  
he is-his  name  \sAnjoanu-iberu,  Ghommid-of-Fear.  He carries  
a huge  tome'in  his hands  in which  ail the sins of the children of 
the earth are recorded,  meticulously  catalogued:  the sin of 
murder,  of lying, of boastfulness,  the sin of maligning,  
shamelesnesss,  envy, arrogance,  greed,  and all other  kinds of 
evil conduct.  In addition,  some sins appear  to be minor  but are 
rated serious  b'^ Anjonnu-lberu,  Guardian  of the passage  into 
Igbo Olodumare.  Infractions  such as a child eating  three  wraps  
of corn-meal  when he has only been permitted  to eat two, 
being  sent on an errand  yet playing  around  on the way, being  
sent to the river  for water  and breaking  the gourd  on the way, 
putting  on new clothes  only  to have  them  turned  into rags the 
same day, caught  in a lie only to have him follow  it up with 
another,  caught  out in the second  to'hear  him seek refuge  in 
another,  until it appears  that the child wanders  around  with a 
pot of lies on his head  -all these  misdeeds  are listed  in the book  
of Anjonnu-iberu,  keeper  of the gateway  into Igbo  Olodumare.
' "Before  anyone  can gain entry into the forest,  the 
ghommid  makes  that person  swear  to having  committed  these  
sins ever  or never.  If the man refuses  to swear,  he pulls out his 
cudgel  and clobbers  his head, he hits him on the back of the 
neck, smashes  him on the waist and reduces  the person  to






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
walking  scatter-leg  all over  the ground.  If that  person  swears  to 
falsehood,  the moment  he enters  the forest,  the lion with a 
head of forty  eyes will certainly  devour  him. Therefore,  you, 
Olowo-aiye,  brace  yourself,  tighten  the rope that holds your  
trousers  together."
'As soon as the woman  fell silent,  my father  wanted  to 
make his  response,  but his newly  betrothed  smiled,  looked  her 
sister  in the eye and added;  "You,  my dear  elder  sister,  you who 
have  cared  for me since  our infancy, do not now  leave me all by 
myself,  for the well-being  of the elder  is the well-being  of the 
sibling.  Even as a branch  of the family  rises against  another  
branch  and relation  may poke  relation  in the eye, nonetheless,  
a member  of the family  compound  cannot  help but aid another  
,member.  Aid my beloved  in this matter,  for his own capabilities  
will not suffice.  Even my own powers  fall short of what is 
.needed.  The wisdom  of the child  cannot  match  that  of an elder. 
As we proceed  into this forest,  my fears  will be reduced  .if you 
act as overseer  of the venture,  as my senior  partner,  and if the 
Creator  is pleased  with my betrothed,  he will not fail to regain 
home."
'Thus  spoke  Ajediran,  placing  her sister  on a pedestal.  
As the pronouncement  of our elders  promises,  "a child that 
knows  how  to wash  his hands  will eat together  with  an elder"  - 
•her sister  was delighted.  She said to her, "How  happy  1 am-that  
my mother  did give birth to you. There are others who,  
•glimpsing  a marital home,  forget  their  home  of origin.  They  are






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
like climbers  which  have  no roots,  which  cannot  survive  unless  
they  cling  to trees*,  yet the day  that  the tree  falls,  their  own  span  
of life is ended,  on the day they encounter  difficulties  in their  
new home, finding a trustworthy  confidant  becomes  
impossible.  After  that,  there  is nothing  left but sighs  and tears,  
the waters  of folly begin  to ooze from their  eyes,  the fever of 
stupidity  drips from their nostrils,  all appetite  for food  
vanishes.  It is an abomination  in the sight  of God that even  the 
mighty  tree should  forget  its roots, that a woman  sights a 
marital  home  and forgets  her beginnings.
' "But you, Ajediran,  you are not among the 
unteachable.  You hold  your  sister  in high esteem,  and certain  it 
is that a sibling  who praises  her elder  today  will not fail to be 
raised  high in turn tomorrow.  The eyes ofcthe  living are not 
blinded,  but remain  wide open,  and far-seeing.  There  are so 
many  kinds  of humanity  in the world,  such as those  who have 
not sufficient  money  for a bungalow  but begjn to build a 
multiple  storey  building,  ramming  the cap of the thoughtless  
against  their heads.  Ajediran,  guard  well the good character  
that  the Almighty  has given  you. Your  conduct  will place  you in 
high esteem,  and I thank  you. On my part,  1 shall  not embark  on 
unbecoming  behaviour,  an elder  who comports  herself  like a 
junior,  who jettisons  her place of honour  and pursues  the 
crooked  paths  of schemers.  I shall exert  the uttermost  for your  
man,  and I shall  prepare  myself  with  resolve.  Come  on, let's  go."
'When  the woman  was done, she dug into her waist






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO OLODUMARE
band and brought  out a fruit with a shiny skin, and after  
looking  it a while,  threw  it into her mouth  -this  was  the last my 
father  saw of her, she had vanished  suddenly.  However,  a little 
while  later,  a fly perched  on an open  wound  on my father's  leg, 
the very  wound  he had sustained  from a tree stump  during  his 
fight  with Esu-kekere-ode.  When  my father  swatted  it away,  it 
turned  into  a snake  and began  to wind  itself  around  my father's  
leg so that he began to run helter-skelter.  Next the snake  
turned  Into a rat, the rat into a big rodent,  the rodent  into a 
snail, the snail Into a tortoise,  the tortoise  into a python,  the 
python  into a lion, the lion into an elephant,  and finally  the 
elephant  was restored  to'the  shape  of this woman,  the elder  
sister  of my father's  wife.
'She turned  to my father  and offered  the fruit in her 
hand  to him, saying,  "Take  this, 1 have  tried it before  your  very 
eyes and it worked.  Any time that you are faced with grave  
danger, throw it  in your  mouth,  call out the name  of whatever  
you would  like to be transformed  into, and you will Instantly  
find yourself  changed  accordingly."  Olowo-aiye  thanked  the 
woman  and Ajediron  added  her thanks  on behalf  oTher  new 
acquired  lover,  after  which  they  all prepared  and resumed  their  
journey.
'Not long after, they had Igbo Olodumare  within  sight,  
but it was already  evening,  and no one could enter this 
dangerous  forest  at night, unless  one wished  to be instantly  
impaled.  For innumerable  species  of beings  frolic  about  during






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
the night,  small and big, those  with eyes and those  without,  
those  with two heads  or three,  stark naked  ones and others  
merely  covered  in leaves,  those  shaped  in the like of gorillas  as 
well as horned  species,  such were  the denizens  that filled  this 
forest right  to its very  entry  point,  and night  time is when  they  
play  and prowl  all over  the place. For  this reason, my father  and 
the two  women  slept  in a rock  cave  throughout  the night.
'However,  before they slept that night, Ajediran  
revealed  to my father  that she remembered  a medicine  that 
she kept in her waist  band,  it was a kind of oil. She took  out the 
oil and rubbed  his body with it, assuring  him that, when he 
woke  up in themorning,  he would  feel immensely  energized.
'True enough,  when it dawned  the following  day, my 
father's  bones  felt like those of a gorilla's,  and his eyeballs  
underwent  a change,  turned  bulging  red. When  he beat his 
new  wife  where  he found  her being  frivolous  all over  the place,  
he nearly  caused  her serious  injury. Mealtime,  each morsel  
that my father  rolled  was as huge  as an orange,  and he ate as 
one sees cattle consuming  grass. The moment  he finished  
eating,  he rose,  slung  his sack  on his arm, hooked  the sheath  of 
his machete  over his shoulder  together  with his gun that  was 
t^lackened  with congealed  blood.  Olowo-aiye  turned  his head  
on the path into Igbo Olodumare,  his eyes  set hard in his head  
and unblinking  like the eyesof  a starving  man.
'When  they  entered  the Forest  and spipd  the Guardian  of 
the Gateway  inithe  distance,  the two women  turned  themselves






OLOWO-AIYE  GOES  TO IGBO  OLODUMARE
into birds,  since  this was an easy feat for them,  being  witches.  
The elder  flew  and perched  on a huge  tree by the entrance,  while  
the junior  flitted  from  one small  tree  to another  along  the route,  
following  my father  as he pursued  his way.
'My father was thus left on his own even as his 
companions  took to the airways  of birds. Nevertheless  my 
father  was indifferent  to death,  did not reject  illness,  feared  no 
unexpected  distress,  remained  undeterred  by any  tribulations  
in this forest  of glistening  dark.  Olowo-aiye  pressed  on, just he 
and his Maker.
'My friend,  there is yet abundance.of  words.  It is not 
fitting  that I narrate  the.trials  that  followed  at this point.  I think  
I- should postpone  the rest till tomorrow.  One should not 
exceed  one's god-given  capabilities.  Sufficient  unto the day






THE FIGHT  AT THE ENTRY  OF 
IGBO  OLODUMARE
iV. ii ................. ijiiiipi,................ .
■I -Mil ■■-■ —............ .............................. ..................... ------------------- --------------------------- ----------------------------- A,......fc„., .......... ............... m..ti. I irtitf n i
Thus went my visitor's  narrative  of that day, and no 
sooner  did it dawn the following  day than I again 
received  him. We did not begin early the second  day 
because  my junior  brothers,  relations  on my mother's  side, 
brought  a little  matter  to me and I requested  leave  of my friend  
to attend to them. That taken care of, my visitor and I 
proceeded*  to the table where we ate. After a little rest 
following  the meal,  we resumed  our work  and he continued his 
narrative.
'Fdend  of mine,  you will recall that yesterday,  we had 
arrived  at the point  where  my father  faced  Igbo  Olodumare  and 
resumed  his mission,  he and his affianced  whom  he had met in 
the forest,  and now made  use of the limited  space  that they  
could  find, enjoying  their  lives between  tree and palm  growth.  
And I did add that my father's  in-law, the elder sister, 
accompanied  them.
'When  my father  came in view of Anjonnu-iberu,  the 
Ghommid-of-Fear,  he had to admit  that he had come  into the 
presence of a creature  of no mean  stature.  This ghommid  wore  
a short  smock  like the hunter's  outfit,  with brief  shorts  that did 
not extend below his knees, but all this attire was blood-






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
soaked,  glossy  red. He used a thick  twining  cord from a tree as 
his belt, and had long knotted  hair like the hair of a lunatic,  it 
was filled  with all kinds  of jungle  debris.  Through  a tiny hole in 
his head,  smoke  belched  out. Chalk  and camwood  were  used  as 
body decorations  all over his frame,  with nose and eyes like 
figures  on the walls  of the shrine  of an orisa  - it was an awe­
inspiring  sight. Cudgel  and iron hook, a load of whips and 
myriad  stones,  human  bones  and the skulls of animals,  bird 
crowns and numberless  snail shells circled the body of 
Anjonnu-iberu,  he who  guards  the gateway  to Igbo Olodumare  
-a mostterrifyingghommid  he is.
'When  my father  made  his appearance,  the ghommid  
had his register  in his hand,  reading.  On sighting  my father,  he 
placed  the book  to one side,  inspected  his cudgel,  caressed  his 
bundle  of whips  and, satisfied  with these  accompaniments  of 
contest,  he burst  into laughter,  stood  with his hands  on his hips, 
walked  a little  forward,  eyeing  Olowo-aiye  as he approached  in 
a carefree  manner,  strutting  as befitted  a warrior.
'When  only a little distance  separated  my father  from  
him, my father  shouted  with all his strength,  demanding,  "Are 
you not Anjonnu-iberu,  Guardian  of the Gateway  to Igbo 
Olodumgre?",  to which  the other replied,  "Yes indeed,  I am 
that very man."  Then  my father  said to him, "If you are indeed  
the Guardian,  open the gate for me, I am here to go hunting,  
hurry  up, I am impatient  to begin."






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'Anjonnu-lberu  roared  with laughter.  He said, "You have 
no idea what's  in store.  What  kind of passage  do you think  this 
is? No one can enter  hear  unless  he or she swears  on this book.  
I am Anjonnu-lberu,  Ghommid  of Fear,  who  serves  as Guardian  
to the Gateway  of the Forest  of the King of Heaven.  I am not 
simply  today's  ebora,  I have been here for ages, my sojourn  
here boasts  Just below a count  of a thousand  years. So, bring  
yourself  over  here,  come  and swear  on this register. If you fail to 
swear,  your punishment  will be most  severe.  If you give false  
testimony,  the lion will have  you for his meal  - restraint  on the 
neck  of the insane!  - when  I have bludgeoned  you on the back  
on the neck,  you will have  tasted  a dose  of what  is yet to come."
'My father  was enraged,  Olowo-aiye  trumpeted  like an 
elephant,  daring  him: "When  major  reverses  knock  a man to 
the ground,  a tiny one then perches  on his head. But for the 
travails  that  are a hunter's  lot, would  you dare  address  me with 
such effrontery?  You pale eyed monster,  bring  your book  over 
here.  If I please,  I shall  swear,  if not, I shall not. If you apply  your  
whips,  I shall deal with you in equal  measure;  if you slap me 
across  the face, I shall buffet  you across  the ears;  if you pelt me 
with stones,  I shall treat  give you cause  for regret my name  is 
Olowo-aiye,  a being  above  mere  mortals,  a hunter  who is the 
master  of hunters."
'The gatekeeper  paid no further  heed to my father.  
Instead  of replying  to his words  and  prolonging  the exchange  of 
taunts,  he calmly  picked  up his ledger,  opened  it at a certain






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
page and placed  it before  my father.  All manners  of human  
criminalities  were tabulated  within,  in both minor  and major  
categories.  He then asked my father  to swear  if he had ever 
committed  any of these  infractions.
'Ah, my friend,  raise your eyes, conversation  resides  in 
human  eyes,  the Lord of Heavens is mighty  as a King.  Take care,  
think  well before  you begin  to decry  your neighbour,  because 
my father  was one who would  preach  to the world  that they 
should  cease  from sinning,  and it was a surprise  to him to find 
that,  on this day, when  he himself  saw  that  the offences  that he 
exhorted others  not to commit,  he had himself  committed,  the 
sins from which  he sought  to wean  them,  he had himself  been 
guilty  of, the paths  away  from  which  he urged  humanity  he had 
often trodden,  the discourse  from which he had steered  his 
fellow  beings,  he had himself  indulged  in, shame  encountered  
shame  when my father  saw these sins in the book of the 
Gatekeeper,  where  the latter had entered  them boldly  and 
indelibly.
'Ah, the feckless  fill the vessel  of the world  to the brim,  
the fear  of humanity  truly  overwhelm  my being,  they  shout  the 
foibles  of others  all over  the place,  they  scream  them  at home,  
they  scream  them  on the farm,  they  scream  them  on the porch,  
they scream  them in the room, they are akin to the well 
appointed  being who is extremely  beautiful  to behold  but 
whose  intestines  are filled with dysentery  and worms,  and 
other  malignancies  of the stomach.  These  are the rootless  ones






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLOOUMARE
who shout  that the roots  of others  are insufficiently  pithy,  the 
parasites  who mock  the iroko  tree, the mere  tendrils  mocking  
the fruit  of the chestnut,  mere  feathers  pronouncing  the stone  
lightweight,  yet the feather merely  floats  on the water  surface  
while  the stone  makes  its home  at the bottom  of the river.  The 
children  of earth  stare  at the back  of the head of others,  never  
attempting  to see the back  of their  own heads.  My friend,  take 
heed,  never  be found  among  the congregation  of the deceitful,  
they  have  lost  their  senses,  their  mouths  are like the two-edged  
sword,  powerful  as the axe which  my father  wields  for pruning  
trees  on his farm.  Their  tongues  exist  to tongues  to push their  
companions  into obscurity.  And why? Because  the devil has 
installed  among  them  the chair  of discord,  where  he is seated  
with joy. Feeling  thoroughly  at home,  he brings  in a reclining  
chair, then a hammock,  where  he sleeps  so deeply  that he 
begins  to snore.  Fix your  eyes on the end, because  Olodumare  
comes  on visitation.  Their  time  is not yet up, bjut it will all unfurl  
before  our very  eyes.  The end of the treacherous  is unpleasant,  
his fall is akin to when a twelve-storey  house  collapses  all at 
once. Remember  that the mist that appears  like silver  before  
one, when  one finally  steps  within  it, it turns out to be mere  
emptiness. .
'My good friend,  when Olowo-aiye  looked  within  the 
book  of the Gatekeeper,  taking  that oath became,  problematic.  
Recounting  that day never  left my father's  tongue,  he would  
repeat  it right from our entries  into the world,  and from  that






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
day, he made  it a strict rule that no one should  ever  talk ill of 
another  behind  that person's  back,  because  among  all mortals  
of our  world,  there  is not one  who  can be accounted  perfect.
'However,  my father refused  to confess  before the 
Gatekeeper,  because  it is the nature  of men not to admit  to 
truths  before  an enemy.  Once  an individual  puts  on the attire  of 
misconduct,  he resorts  to placing  a bold face on embarrassing  
secrets,  the language  of remorse  flees him, everything  
becomes  matter  for aggressiveness.  My father  put down  the 
book,  hissed  in defiance  and announced  to Anjonnu-iberu  that 
he had no intention  of swearing  before  anyone.  Thunderbolt  
on anvil ! Iron hook  on the lunatic's  back!  Ghommid  and human  
swung  into combat!  Violent  eruption  in the realm of Igbo 
Olodumare,  as dust spiraled  upwards  to obscure  the sky. My 
father  and the Guardian  of the Gateway  wrestled  with each  
other my good  friend,  thus  began  an elemental  upheaval  I
'The weird beings of the forest gathered,  animals  
assembled,  the birds also, reptiles  coiled  themselves  around  
branches.  When this contest began, a gong resounded  
throughout  the Igbo Olodumare  and all kinds of abnormal  
species  began  to gather  in spectators  groups.  Only  the elders  of 
the ghommids  failed  to join on account  of impediments  in their  
home.  Nonetheless,  these  appointed  their representatives  to 
witness  and bring  them  back reports.  Anything  with breath  in 
it which normally  would  not emerge  in daylight  broke  their  
habit  and joined,  for there  you saw  the ni^htrodent,  while  owls






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
and bats were seen in the company  of birds. The principal  
animals  who  lived near  the borders  came  out on account  of this 
event the lion stood  there as chairman,  the elephant  as his 
deputy,  and the leopard  was not missing among  the audience.  
Naturally the fishes  could not attend,  for the waters  were far 
from the scene  of the upheaval  any fish that dares emerge  
from  the water  is of course  preparing  its journey  to the other  
world.
'It was a tremendous  combat,  a Chilla of a Thrilla,  one 
that my father never wearied  of recounting  till his death.  
According  to his account,  Anjonnu-iberu  nearly broke my 
father's  back  when  he smashed  him against  a tree.  But he also 
wasted  no time, because  he lifted and crushed  Anjonnu-iberu  
against  a buttress,  a sharp  thorn pierced  him in the foot, and 
light flecks  peeled  off his skin. The fight lasted  ages, for there  
was no restraint  on either combatant,  and none of the 
spectators  soyght  a quick  end to the fight  since  they  considered  
Anjonnu-kekere  an over-assiduous  administrator  who had lost 
all credibility  among  his own peers.  Often he had subjected  
them  to chastisement  whenever  a fight broke  out between  his 
wife and himself  - if anyone  attempted  to intervene  and 
counsel  peace, he turned  a deaf ear, thus he had earned  
himself  an unsavoury  reputation.  The over  assiduous  dons  the 
mantle of disgrace,  whoever  is addressed  by a peace-maker  in 
the course  of a fight should  understand  that he is beloved.  
Anjonnu-iberu  absorbed  much  punishment  on that day and he






TH£  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
began  to pant heavily.  This account  does not flow as sweetly  
from  mytongueasone  would  wish. If you heard  itfrornthe  lips 
of my father, you would have been lost in wonder.  They  
uprooted  stumps  with their bare feet, they felled trees with 
their tread,  they shredded  boughs,  their heels were swollen  
like the bembe  drum,  their bodies  soaked  as if they had been 
drenched  by rain. Eventually  however,  after  a long while,  they 
disentangled  their  limbs,  sat down  and rested.
'While they rested, the wife of the Keeper  of the 
Gateway  brought  food  and water  for her spouse.  When  Olowo-  
aiye's  wife, who had transformed  herself  into a bird, saw this, 
she changed  back  into human  form,  brought  food  from  his sack 
and offered  it to her husband-in-waiting  saying,  "Take  this, eat 
soundly,  don't let anything  upset  your  stomach,  no husband  is 
more  treasured  than  another."
'Thus  did the two  wives  look  after  their  men,  for the care 
of the husband  is the most important  commitment  that a 
woman  who has entered  the marital  home can undertake.  
When  the hearts  of both husband  and wife are gladdened  is 
when  they can take joy in their  children.  Patience  is the father  
and mother  of gain, only the thoughtless  claim that their  
patience  is excessive,  for patience  is infinite.  Let both husband  
and wife understand  that if the patience  they have expended  
on each other  today  exceeds  that of yesterday,  they  will obtain  
riches,  they  will be blessed  with children,  they  will enjoy  peace 
which  transcends  the possession  of money  and children.  Let






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Others  continue  to cheat  you, be patient  with them,  you know  
in your heart that they have thus commenced  their own 
downfall.  If you are cheated,  and you pretend  to be unaware  of 
it, you have thrust  that cheat into a fiery cauldron,  and his 
conscience  will continue  to stoke  up the flames.  But if you are 
not sufficiently  patient,  if you permit  anger against  such a 
reprobate  to consume  you, he will infect  you with the attitude  
of the thoughtless,  he will realize  that he has succeeded  in 
hurting  you, he will flaunt  the mantle  of conceit  in your  face.  
But he has no ambition  to advance  himself  even further,  thus 
he will afflict  you with  sorrow,  blocking  your  path  towards  your  
own  future  advancement.
When  my father  and this ghommid  had rested,  having  
consumed  the handiwork  of their wives,  they resumed  the 
struggle.  Smoke  continued  to issue from the forehead  of this 
ghommid  a most terrifying  sight it was. By the time they  
commenced  this second  round,  Igbo Olodumare  was bursting  
at the seams  with the forest  denizens.  Ah, God in Heaven  is a 
mighty  being my father  underwent  the ordeal  of his life, 
Olowo-aiye  was indeed  a sturdy  fighter  of a man. The battle  
waxed  even more  furious,  for the contest  had now dragged  in 
its wake  the risk of disgrace,  seeing  that the two wives  were  
present,  observing  the progress  of their husbands.  My dear  
scribe,  do you not agree  that one must  always  prepare  oneself  
for such a fight? When  someone  attempts  to floor  you in the 
very presence  of your wife, is it not obvious  that such a man






TH£  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
intends  to cover  you in shame?  When  the fight  is over,  indignity  
will not depart  from one, the husband  will not dare utter  one 
word in contention  before  the wife leaps  in hot aggression  at 
him. When  it reaches  that point  where  the woman  slaps the 
man and the man escapes  into the bedroom,  when  he sneaks  
out through  the back door,  when  the woman  twists  the man's  
clothes  around  his neck,  countermands  his orders,  flounces  out 
on visits  without  informing the husband,  where  the man asks 
the wife where  she has been and the eye responds  with a 
sweep  of contempt,  do you not agree  that a dire eventuality  
has indeed  hit the earth?
'Thus the wife disrespects  the husband,  it becomes  
inevitable  that matters  would  unfold  in this manner  between  
wife and husband.  On this count,  on the day that Olowo-aiye  
took on the Guardian  of the Gateway,  tumult  on turmoil  had 
indeed  invaded  the Forest  of the Heavenly  King.
'What  then exacerbated  the situation  were  the bembe  
and gangan  drums  that were introduced  into the fight by the 
forest denizens.  Before  the second  encounter,  the kobolds  
began  to beat  the mother  drum, monkeys  and gorillas  the baby  
drums  and, having  enquired  by what name my father  was 
known,  drumsticks  dug into drumskin,  intoning:
' "Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye,  take him on, ram him, take 
him on, ram him, son of Akowediran.  Olowo-aiye,  can you not 
live up to your father's  fame?  Can you not show  you're  your  
father's son? Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye,  are you in good  health?






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Are you in good shape?  Hope nothing  is the matter.  Hope  
nothing  ails you. Olowo-aiye,  you have cudgel  to the right  side  
of you, a load ofwhipsonthe  left, the fall ofAnyonm/staresyou  
in the face in the shape  of that huge rock.  Olowo-aiye,  seize  this 
creature  by the legs, lift him clean  above  ground.  Olowo-aiye,  
the eyes of ghommids  are on you, the eyes of humans  are on 
you, all living  things are assembled  on this clearing,  filling  it to 
the brim!"
'Thus did the drums resound  in a frenzy,  while the 
breaths  of the pair came fast and furious,  while the rest of 
forest  was wrapped  in total silence.  After a while,  Anjonnu-  
/beru  yanked  my father's  right  leg clean  off the ground,  raising  it 
towards  his shoulder,  but my father  planted  himself  with the 
left as the ghommid  began  to push  him towards  a pit, so that he 
would  fall into the hole and be wedged  inextricably  in it. My 
father  however  rescued  his right leg and stood firmly  with 
both. The next moment  Anjonnu-iberu  had bent low. He lifted  
my father  completely  from  the ground,  throwing  him forward  
with all his strength.  It was on both legs that my father  landed  
however,  rpck solid. He looked  at the eborq and laughed,  
saying,  "The back of a cat cannot  touch the ground  - it is 
taboo!"  Theforest  assemblage  cheered.
'It was now  the turn of my father  to hoist  Onibode  on to 
his shoulders,  rushing  him on with the intent  of smashing  his 
back  against  a huge  boulder  nearby,  but the moment  he arrived  
at his target,  the other  performed  a monkey  sommersault  to






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
the ground,  landed  on both feet planted  solid. His supporters  
also walloped  their  drums  in joy, congratulating  the kobold  on 
his narrow  escape.
'Eventually,  the kobold grew furious, decided  to 
manifest  himself  as a singular  being  indeed,  and turned  himself  
into a lion. Since my father  was no neophyte  in the hunter's  
trade,  he also showed  himself  as a seasoned  hand,  he took  out 
the fruit  given  him by his wife,  threw  it in his mouth  and turned  
himself  into a lion, so lion engaged  lion in a fight while the 
forest  roiled  from  end to end in deafening  roars.  The spectators  
took  to their heels,  running  helter-skelter.  Some  time elapsed  
and this ghommid  turned  into a boa-constrictor,  Olowo-aiye  
followed  suit, the forest erupted  in animal cries. They  
proceeded  in this  fashion,  changing  into animal  forms  one after  
the other until they both reverted  to that of the boa. The 
moment  that  Olowo-Aiye  saw his adversary  switch  to the shape  
of a boa-constrictor  - he seized  his chance!  Swift as lightning,  
he transformed  himself  into an elephant,  whereupon  he 
grabbed  the reptile  by the head and reduced  it to mere pulp.  
Thus did Olowo-aiye  see the end of the Gatekeeper,  in an 
elemental  struggle,  a Chilla of a Thrilla  that would  become  a 
reference  point throughout  the world at that time. Even till 
tod^y,  the elders  do not cease to speak  of the fight at the 
gateway  to Igbo  Olodumare,  where  both man and spirit  turned  
into pythons  and boa constrictors,  and even transformed  
themselves  into  the elephant,  patriarch  of all animals.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'To cut our Story short, my father  returned  to human  
form,  but no one ever  heard of Anjonnu-iberu  any more;  he had 
perished  utterly.  My father  took  the corpse  of-the  boa, lit a fire 
and burnt  it, rain floods  flushed  one part into a small stream  
where  the smoke  from its head turned  into a poisonous  fish 
that exists  till today  - the day I encounter  this species  of fish, I 
shall ensure  that I show  it to you. The other  part that was not 
flushed  into the stream from these ashes turned into a 
scorpion  — again I promise  to show you the very specimen  
when  next i encounter  it. For its part, the clearing  where  the 
fight  took place never  grew  another  blade  of grass.  The forest  
dwellers  built a house  on that spot, where  the new elected  
Gatekeeper  resided.  This new keeper  was not like the former;  
he loved  humans  and he loved  animals,  he loved  the mortals  of 
earth  and he loved  the dwellers  of heaven.
'However,  what  was the end product  of this fight  for my 
father?  Its aftermath  was indeed  a great  blessing  to him. The 
mansion  which was raised for the new Keeper  was built of 
stone,  and the following  worlds  were inscribed  about  him on 
the face of the outer  perimeter  of the wall that encased  the 
forest.  That  inscription  read:
THIS BUILDING  HAS BEEN RAISED  IN HONOUR  OF OLOWO- 
AIYE, ONE OF- THE HUMAN  RACE WHO CAME INTO IGBO  
OLODUMARE  TO HUNT.  IT WAS  HIS FORTITUDE  THAT  ENABLED  
HIM TO OVERPOWER  THE GHOMMID-OF-FEAR  WHO WAS  
THEN THE GATEKEEPER  OF THE FOREST  OF THE KING OF






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
HEAVEN.  FOR THIS REASON,  WHOEVER  IS LACKING  IN 
FORTITUDE  IS FORBIDDEN  FROM  ENTERING  THIS FOREST  FOR 
THE PURPOSE  OF HUNTING.  FOR THERE IS NO ONE WHO  
DISPLAYS  HIS BURDEN  OF TRAVAILS  ON HIS SHOULDER.  THE 
BURDEN  OF ANY INDIVIDUAL  IS NOT THE SAME  AS THAT OF 
ANOTHER,  BUT  WITH  PERSEVERANCE,  THE KING  OF HEAVEN  IS 
READY  TO EASE THE BURDEN  OF ONE AND ALL IN FULL  
MEASURE.
'Thus  went  the inscription  on the outer  face of the wall 
of this house  and remains  there  till this day. However,  it is sad to 
relate that the new Gatekeeper  did not long remain  in his 
position,  for even as things  transpire  among  humans,  so do 
they among  ghommids.  Because  this Keeper  did not treat his 
fellow beings as slaves, did not regard them indentured  
servants,  preferred  to relate  to them  as creatures  of decency  
and socialized with  them,  they  turned  his sword  to a plaything.  
So indeed  we find it among  humans,  as among  the ghommids.  
There  are beings  of contumely  in the world  who  will never  build  
upon  the advantages  that  the Lord has given  them,  they  are the 
ones who exhaust  the well of kindness.  If you show them  
respect,  treat  them  as beings of reflection,  what  you receive  in 
turn is disdain  rather than sincere  affection;  They can be 
Jikened  to a huge  tree that has fallen  across  the road  - it blocks  
.the passage  of vehicles.  Once  you have interacted  with such 
people,  you are disinclined  to act kindly  to those  who follow






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
them.  It is the rotten  part of the world  they prefer  to feast  on 
may  God rescue  humanity  from  such people!
My good  friend,  I implore  you, if any  one places  you on a 
pedestal,  if an*important  person  goes out of his way to treat  
you like an equal,  raise him even  higher  so that he understands  
that he is not disrespected.  Those  who  fail to do this serve  as a 
lesson  to others,  because  they make the powerful  weary  of 
goodness.  For this reason,  the powerful  behave  anyhow  to 
those who come after them and why? Because  they say to 
themselves  that the returns for their kindness  end in 
disrespect.  Those  who behave in this manner  earn reprobation  
of the black  race,  of the white,  and of the in-between,  and they  
leave  the Almighty  only regrets,  so that he laments;  "Had I but 
known,  I would  have created  these ones as animals,  so that 
they  eat the leaves  of the forest,  and are game  for hunters  with 
guns from generation  to generation."  However  the King of 
Heavens  would  never  utter  such  words,  for he is indeed  a Being  
ofcompassipn.
They now began to heap abuse on the Gatekeeper  
everywhere,  complaining that he indulged  wayfarers,  that he 
did not chasfise  them  as he should,  that he let them  disregard  
the Forest  of the King  of Heaven.  They  began  to praise  Anjonnu-  
iberu  for the very cruelties  he had inflicted  on them.  For this 
reason,  the new Gatekeeper  began  to change  his attitude.  He 
behaved  in ways  that  God had not implanted  in him.  The end of 
the matter  was that he became  far more  brutal  than  Anjonnu-






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
iberu.  When  these beings  now found  themselves  in shackles 
that  weighed  them  down,  found  themselves  burdened  beyond  
endurance,  they hatched  a dastardly  plot against the 
Gatekeeper,  until he himself  abandoned  his post at the 
gateway  and relocated  to the Forest  of a Thousand  Daemons  
where  he resides  till this very  day.
'However,  we praise the Lord that the Forest of a 
Thousand  Daemons  proved  more  congenial  to this being  than  
even the Forest  of the King of Heaven.  For when  even I went  
hunting  in that forest, 1 found that he no longer  lived in a 
bungalow,  but in a house  with three  floors  sitting  on top of one 
another.
'Let this be a lesson, my dear friend. If a man is 
exceedingly  hard, he will be abused  by people;  if he is over 
gentle,  he will be also be abused,  but if one strikes  the right  
balance,  even if one still earns  the insults  of the foolish  people  
of the world,  one would  still receive  the plaudits  of the wise,  
and would not meet  with  the disapprobation  of God.
'My dear scribe,  I salute  your industry,  let me continue  
With the adventures  of Olowo-aiye,  for this was what  occupied  
us before 1 diverted  to the story of Anjonnu-iberu's  
replacement.  I had reached  the point where my father's  
exploits  were inscribed  on the wall, and his praises  sung 
everywhere.  Surely  it would  surprise  you that  these  people  did 
no more  than this for my father,  and you would  be right  - they
L






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
did a lot more.
'When  my father  had seen  the end of that ghommid, all 
the dwellers  of Igbo  Olodumare  gathered  together  and led him 
to their  king.  Quickly  they  divested  him of his hunting  outfit  and 
dressed  him in a velvet  agbada  with trousers  also of velvet.  
They  sat a velvet  cap on his head like a crown,  decorated  with 
gold  than  dazzled  the eye, shod  his feet in copper  shoes,  placed  
golden  rings on his fingers  and necklaces  of gold around  his 
neck. Next they placed a beaded  cane in his hands. His 
betrothed  was also decked  in jewels  from head  to feet,  turning  
her radiant  like a rainbow,  her teeth  gleaming  like the noonday  
sun. Only this woman  shared the cup of glory in Igbo 
Olodumare  and — yes, it is I who declare  this — my father  was a 
gorgeous  specimen  of manhood.  I say this not because  he was 
my father, it was our own townspeople  who turned his 
appearance  into song  with  the refrain:  0/owo-o/ye,  the elegant  
one.
'When they had bedecked  the pair in such  
magnificence,  they placed  them in a carriage  and set forth.  It 
was a memorable  day in this mighty forest,  both animals  and 
birds saluting  "Kabiyesi",  the animals  bowing their heads  and 
the roots  making  obeisance  as Olowo-aiye  and his wife basked 
in the air ofadulation,  their  progress  covered  in glory.
'When they arrived  at the palace of the Forest of 
Olodumare,  ah, words  vanish  in the jaws  of reality!  For this was 
a palace  of great  beauty,  its beauty  being  beyond  description.






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
As they arrived  at the palace  precincts,  the king himself was 
within,  and when he appeared,  my father  was deeply  awed.  
Instantly  he prostrated  himself,  scooped  up some earth and 
poured  it on his head,  saluted,  'Kabiyesi';  he exalted  the king  as 
was befitting.
'The king asked  him, "Are you truly  the man who killed  
Anjonnu-iberu?"  and my father replied,  "Kabiyesi,  it was 
indeed  I." The king again asked,  "How  did you manage  this feat 
of destroying  Anjonnu-iberu?"  What did you rely upon that 
enabled  you to accomplish  this feat?"  My father  again  replied,  
saying, "May  God  grant  you life. Myfight  plan  was  a very  simple  
one. I had resolved  to take on the ghommid,  and I began  the 
fight.  I submitted  myself  to the hazards  of the fight,  and placed  
my trust  in my Creator.  Kabiyesi,  I would  like you to know  from  
this day that anyone  who desires  something  good, who 
resolves  on something  good,  who  embarks  on something  good  
and places  his reliance  on the Lord such  an individual  can never  
be found  at the rear  of crowd,  never!"  The king  then  asked  him, 
"Have  you espoused  a woman  yet?"
My father  then replied,  "I do have an intended,  there  she is, 
seated  in the carriage."
'Then the king raised his voice,  thunderously,  saying, 
".Man  of great  daring,  you son of the human  race,  it is here  that  I 
shall arrange  your marriage.  There  is wisdom  in your head. I 
shall preside  over your wedding  within  two or three months  
from today.  I shall send for my friends  in the hills and in the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
valleys  of this forest,  I shall send to the borders  of heaven that 
they  all come  and feast  and make  merry  in honour  of my friend.  
All of you, my children,  I want  you to inscribe  it in your hearts  
from this day that there is nothing  in this world  that anyone  
cannot  achieve:  he who seeks wealth  can become  wealthy,  
whoever  seeks  importance  can become  important,  but the idle 
who  does  not wish  to suffer  yet seeks  importance  will definitely  
be the last among  the crowd  for ever. The house  servant  who  
apprentices  himself  today,  who assiduously  studies  a trade,  
who places  his reliance  on his Creator,  let such never  fear, let 
him continue  to persevere.  Even if he cannot  afford  a cup of 
farina  today  and must manage  with a spoonful  of corn pap, 
even  when  he cleans  up the chamber  pot of his master  when  he 
has relieved  himself,  sees his master  wear  velvet,clothes  while  
he is dressed  in rags, let him understand  that he shall be 
elevated  in life in the days  that follow. All the functions  that he 
fulfills  as a servant  of the house,  others  will bestow  him in the 
same manner.  I say nothing  but the truth, for lies are 
unbefitting  the children  of men, neither  do they befit  the race 
ofghommids.
' "Lead Olowo-aiye  away, he who rescued Igbo 
Olodumare  from the hands of Anjonnu-ibveru,  bathe him, 
clothe  him, adorn  him even  more  sumptuously  than  at present.  
Take him and his betrothed  to the most luxurious  storey  
building  in the palace  grounds,  let him reside  there.  When  a 
little time has passed,  I shall myself  perform  the nuptials  for






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
this son of Akowediran."
'And so it came  about  that  they  began  to take care of my 
father,  lodging  him with his betrothed  for three months  until 
the king came  and wedded  them  to each other.  During  these  
three  months,  my father  fed, rounded  out, his neck  thickened.  
Until he left this world,  therewasnoday  when  wedid  not burst  
into laughter  when  he boasted,  as was his habit,  "I fed until my 
stomach  was round  and taut like the stomach  of a small bird, 
my buttocks  ballooned  and wobbled  like a mound  of amala.  As 
for my wife, the door  became  too narrow  for her to negotiate,  
her buttocks  would  require  the strength  of six stalwarts  to carry  
and the thickness  of her neck  could  have been  shared.by  eight  
people.  Even her walk had changed,  she eased  up one leg at a 
time like cattle  browsing  on a grassy  patch.  Her comportment  
was no longer  that of an ordinary  person,  she began  to act as a 
Madame  of social  standing.  Nobility  does not like to walk  the 
walk  of a commoner,  the rich do not like to walk  the walk  of the 
poor, and women  are lovers  of ostentation.  Even my sister-in-  
law had similarly  changed  her posture.  Her countenance  was 
fresh  like young  leaves  on an orange  tree and her skin smooth  
like a three-day  old infant.  We all ate delicious  food,  we dug into 
stew  that  was out of the world,  we ate the arm of livestock,  we 
ate the thigh,  we ate the liver, we ate the gizzard,  we ate the 
delicacies  of the throat."
* 'This  was how my father  loved  to speak  of that  change  in
ihis fortunes.  Whenever  he did, we would collapse  with






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
laughter,  fall over  one another  and roll around  the floor.
'On my father's  wedding  day, the entirety  of the forest  
was encircled  by unrestrained  jollification.  All manner  of food  
was assembled  in the king's  palace  - pounded  yam and okra 
soup with assorted  meats,  rice and melon  seed fried pepper  
stew  with onions.  Eba and corn mealie  wraps,  accompanied  by 
vegetable  ragout  pocked  with succulent  meats.  There was 
bean pottage  garnished  with whitebait  and sun-dried  sea 
shrimps  in abundance.  Fried  yams  counted  for nothing  Just as 
fried plantains  were  generally  ignored  at this wedding  feast. It 
is an impossible  task to enumerate  these  various  delicacies,  
including  bread  and’butter,  plus those  European  candies  and 
local biscuits  that our clever  women  have learnt  to duplicate  
with coconuts  and sugar.  Bembe  and boto drums,  gourd  rattle  
and pot resonators,  the goje  and bolo in addition  to other  local  
ad foreign  drums all were  fully  represented  at this fiesta  - it 
was indeed  a memorable  day.
'It pains me however  to have to inform  you that the 
celebration  ended on a discordant  note, even though  the 
animal  guests  had been installed  at their  own separate  table.  
The lion presided  as'chairman,  the elephant  his deputy,  while  
the smaller  beasts  served  as waiters.  The  violence  began in this 
manner:  whenever  the lion requested  anything,  which was 
duly  brought  by the antelope,  he being  the head  of the servers,  
the lion would  began  to scratch  the antelope  and draw him 
close  as if he wanted  to devour  the latter,  declaring  that he was






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
merely  teasing  him. After  a while,  the antelope  could  take it no 
longer and complained  to the bridegroom.  And a similar  
pattern  had developed  among  the birds.  Ostrich,  the patriarch  
of birds, who had been invited  to serve as chairman  of the 
feathered  section,  was unable  to attend,  thanks  to some  
domestic  problem,  and it was the kite  that  substituted  for him. 
The domesticated  birds had also proved  unable  to participate  
but sent a delegation  of six pedigree  fowl. Whenever  the kite 
left his assigned  place,  he would  stroll over  to these  six guests 
and begin  to caress  them,  reassuring  the watchers  that he was 
merely  engaging  them  in piay. The fox joined  in this unseemly  
conduct,  he obtained  permission  from Chairman  Lion, came 
among  the birds and began  staring  them in the face it was 
altogether  a most  despicable  conduct.
'To cut a long  story  short,  animals  and bird got drunk  and 
began  to behave  in an unruly  manner.  The elephant  knocked 
down  trees,  the lion began  his onslaught  on the animals,  the 
fox killed  one of the fowl delegates  and the kite began  chasing  
the»birds  all over  the place.  In the end, the bridegroom chased 
them  all out.
'The procession  of the ghommids  into the place of 
feasting  was however  awe-inspiring.  To begin  with, take their  
gpparel:  some wore beaded  robes, others  wore'  crowns  of 
coins, some'Sported  gold encrusted  staffs, and yet others  
brought  with them diamond-studded  cutlery  with which,  to 
dine.  Some  attire  gieamed  like silver,  no footgear  was made,  of






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
leather.  Where  some  trod the ground  on golden  shoes,  other  
shoes  were of beaten  brass, and the rested  were beaded  - 
except  of course  those  who  had no feet  to speak  of, who merely  
hopped  around  like frogs.  Several  of them  were  very much  like 
humans,  even as the King of the Forest  was not different  in 
appearance  from  you and me. There  were  however  many  who 
did not share  any notable  affinity  to humans,  who nevertheless  
enhanced  their  appearance  in their  own way. Osanyin  the one-  
legged  did not neglect  his one leg, encasing  it in a golden  boot.  
These  ghommids  did not deign  to use another's  plate  - each 
had brought  his or her own dishes  from home,  as well as 
spoons  and drinking  cups.  When  they  retired  towards  evening,  
they left behind  numerous  possessions  as gifts for my father.  
The event  was sensational  in the Forest  of the King of Heaven, 
for when the ghommids  had drunk  and become  tipsy, they  
commenced  dancing,  even  within  their  limitations.
'When  they had all dispersed,  my father  gathered  all 
these  valuables  th’at had been  donated  to him, and he became  
a wealthy  man for a very long time. But for the burglars  who 
raided  our home  after  his departure  from  the Forest,  his wealth  
would  have been such that those  of us like me would  never  
have needed  to wprk  to live. For I wish to remind  you that my 
father  had attended  school  before  he embarked  on our hunting  
occupation,  and the knowledge  he had imbibed  at school  
enabled  him to look after  his wealth. The home  of the learned  
is not the place  of the poor,  even if they  lack riches  today,  they






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
are certain  to accumulate  them  tomorrow.  Furthermore,  when  
my father  got lost in the Forest  of Edumare  where  he slew  
Ojola-ibinu  who  was the head  of snakes  throughout  the world,  
my father  discovered  a rare object  which provided  him the 
wherewithal  you will hear  of this adventure  indue  course.
'This  was the manner  in which the king of the Forest  of 
Edumare  spent  lavishly  on the wedding  of my father  on that 
day; it was a day without  precedent  since  the day that  the king 
ascended  the throne.
'On the morning  of the following  day, my father  rose 
early  at dawn  and went  to express  his gratitude. When  he saw 
the king, he prostrated  himself  fully on the ground  and 
exclaimed:
' "Kabiyesi,  may the King of Heaven  give you a long life, 
may  Edumare  grant  you a long  sojourn  on earth.  Death  will not 
kill you, disease  will not take you prisoner,  you will wear  well,  
you will raise goodness,  you shall long be father  to us. I salute  
the generous  hand that you stretched  over me yesterday,  I 
salute  your hospitality,  I salute  your care. I want  you to know  
that all that you have  done  was not for me, but for the King of 
fHeaven.  I am certain  that  just as the evil-doer  comes  to reap  his 
deserts  in the end, even so shall  the man of goodness  reap his 
.reward  in good returns.  I am keenly  aware  of what  you have 
done  for me, your  recompense  rests  in the hands  of the Creator  
of all things,  and your returns  will surely  descend  from the 
other  world.  The rain of blessings  is gathering,  it will surely  pour






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
over your head. Kabiyesi,  have you not observed  the weevils  
which attack farm crops, ruining  yams, spoiling  plantains,  
preventing  maize  from ripening  - all this is simply  God's  way of 
instruction.  For even so are ingrates,  they are like these  
destructive  insects,  they nibble  their  fellow  beings  at the stalk  
so they will not grow, making  sure they stagnate  like a still 
pond.  One whom  we have  done  a good  turn and does  not know  
it is like one whom  we have rescued  from  danger,  who sees our 
first-born  and  turns  his gun on him: judgment  on such  a type is 
not in the hands  of man, it lies in the hands  of God. Kabiyesi,  I 
know the munificence  you have lavished  on me, may the 
Almighty  permit  that I am able to reveal  to you through  my 
conduct  that it is oyer  the most  secure  portion  of my heart  that 
you preside."
'These  were  the words  spoken  by my father.  He thanked  
his benefactor,  and his benefactor  was in turn overjoyed  that 
he had not spread  his largesse  on an ingrate,  that he had not 
slipped  a gown  of>sanyan  over the neck of a pig, or graced  a 
gorilla  with trousers,  that he had not placed  a warrior's  pants  
on the buttocks  of a woman,  made  a hypocrite  the head of an 
association,  the treacherous  chairman  of a gathering,  that he 
had not lavished  his care  on the undeserving.
'The king replied  in turn: "Olowo-aiye,  you have  spoken  
well, I thank  you. It is upon such conduct  that we urge the 
children  of the world to model  themselves,  both black and 
white and the neither-nor.  That children  accord  elders  the






f
THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO  OLODUMARE
place  of elders;  that  the servant  accords  the master  the place  of 
master,  the master  in turn concedes  to the servant  the place  of 
servant,  that the husband  concedes  the wife the place  of wife 
and the wife also grants  the husband  the place of husband.  
Why  do I say these  things?  You, Olowo-aiye,  you rose  this early  
morning,  ignored  the chilly air, you entered  my home,  took  
your  seat and began  to honour  me. You did not regard  me as a 
slave,  you did not regard  me as an indentured  servant,  you did 
not say, what can this decrepit  old man do in any case? No, 
instead  ofall  that,  you chose  to lavish  praises  on me. Ithankyou  
deeply.  You are one who  values  kindness.
' "Has  one not done  far more  for others,  yet they  see you 
the following  day and hardly  acknowledge  the tip of your  nose?
I
; And when  one asks, "What?  No greeting,"  they respond,  "Do I 
owe you something?"  Therefore  I want you to know that 
yesterday  was mere child's  play. May God preserve  our lives,  
, may  God let us get to know  each  other  long,  because  as long  as
I
there  is life, the rest is trivial  - life is the ultimate  decide.r.^But  
this much I shall say to you: there is so much depressing  
conduct  among  humans  that we ghommids  do not like to live 
! among  them.  But for the high tolerance  level of the humans  
•themselves  in enduring  such behaviour,  mutual slaughter  
Bmong  themselves  would  be a daily occurrence.  Olodumare  
loves humanity,  but through  their own behaviour,  they  
distance  themselves  from their Maker,  yet the sinner  will not 
^escape  punishment, and so the sins of humanity  prevent  them






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
from  enjoying  the delights  of the world.
' "The  following  therefore  is my thinking:  remain  within  
Igbo Olodumare  at my palace where we shall enjoy each 
other's  company.  When  you feel like hunting,  pick up your  gun 
and go hunting  in this Forest,  returning  to sleep  at the palace.  I 
urge  you to consider  this proposal,  for it is not meet  that  youth  
should  reject  elderly  advice,  except  such advice  is one that  will 
mislead  him. Once  more,  I thank  you for undertaking  this visit.  
My greetings  to your  wife,  and remember  me also to her elder  
sister."
'Thus  did the king address  my father,  my father  thanked  
him again  as was befitting,  promised  also that he would  return  
home  and place  his offer  before  his wife.  When  the two of them  
had thoroughly  considered  it, he would bring back a reply.  
Again they  exchanged greetings,  the king returned  to his inner  
chambers,  while  my father  found  his way  into  the compound.
'When  my father  arrived  home,  he conveyed  what  had 
transpired  to her, and when  the two had considered  the matter,  
they  resolved  to remain  for a long  while  with  the king,  and even  
further,  that if things  worked  out well,  they might  even  decide  
to make  this  their  permanent  home.
'Thus  ends  the first part of the memorable  episodes  in 
the life of my father.  The second  part is just as eventful  but, my 
good  friend,  let us reserve  that  till tomorrow.  This second  part 
will not prove  difficult to  transcribe,  since my father  set it all 
down  in his own handwriting  before  he died.  That manuscript






THE  FIGHT  AT THE  ENTRY  OF IGBO OLODUMARE
is not with me right now, when I bring it with me tomorrow  
morning,  I shall put myself  in my father's  place  and read it to 
you. You will take it all down  as if it is my father  who came  to 
seek  you out and began to narrate  his life story  for you. And  so, 
good-bye  for now,  expect  me early  dawn  tomorrow.'
Thus  did the man conclude  and take his ieave  that day. 
He had shown  himself  an upright  type,  a man of his word,  and 
so at the first gleam  of the morning,  i was already  geared  for 
work. I had prepared  the tools of writing  even before he 
entered  the house.
When he came into my home the following  day, he 
brought  with him the manuscript  that his father  had written  
with his own hands  and showed  it to me. On those  pages,  his 
father  had narrated  his own story  from  the time  of his stay with 
the King of the Forest  of Olodumare  till that moment  when  he 
finally  returned  home.
Having displayed  the script and spread himself  
comfortably  in a chair, my visitor  stressed  that I should  regard 
him as if he was himself  Olowo-aiye,  now assuming  his father's  
voice.  Thereafter  he began  to read to me. I sat attentively  as 
one who takes a dictation  and plunged  into work.  These  words  
that Olowo-aiye  had himself  set down  in his own hand,  words  
that his son now read to me, form the second  part of this 
history.






if -
1
I
I
I
I
I
t
i
I
iii mmmmmmmsBBsm






PART II
THE WRITTEN  ACCOUNT  
OF
AKARA-OGUN'S  FATHER,  OLOWO-AIYE  
(THE  SON  OF AKOWEDIRAN)












THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE 
FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SO!
InfHHtiiri  ^,11 j, ji II l■■|p^|l■^■^^ll ^l|JH|(l_JfTlT lllllll Til it~ji 1—rr——   'miupjiMpwwm nim'    
I, Olowo-aiye,  son of Akowediran  the man of legendary  beauty,  
came to Igbo Olodumare  to hunt, 1 encountered  immense  
tribulations,  but the King of Heaven  extricated  me from  them.  
In the end I arrived  at the palace  of the king  of Igbo  Olodumare,  
he made  me a present  of a lavish  wedding,  and that wife gave  
birth to my son Akara-ogun.  That king spent  with no thought  
for the cost, he truly  extended  himself,  he took  care  of me the 
way that one would  expect  from onfe who has genuine  love for 
another.  It thus occurred  to me that I should  begin  to set down  
the story  of my life, because  my eyes have  seen much  travailin  
the past, and the conduct  of this king testified  that whatever  
one has endured  in the past deserves  placing  on record  for the 
benefit of those who come behind. It will help them  
understand  that the world is full of valleys,  of plains, and 
ynountains.  I, who fought  Anjonnu-lberu,  Guardian  of the 
Gateway  of Igbo Olodumare,  where my portion  on earth  
seemed  definitely  expired,  was the same adventurer  who 
found himself  seated  in a carriage  with his intended  wife,  
•lording  it over a multiple  storey-building,  one whose  wedding  
teverberated  round  the eartb  and was rhapsodized  in heaven  -






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
I felt duty bound  to write down  the story  of my life, for we do 
not know  what  may  transpire  tomorrow.
It is only God who teaches  wisdom  to the king of Igbo 
Olodumare,  not letting him act like one who lacks good  
judgment  and places  obstacles  in the path of a stranger.  He 
understood  that a town which hates strangers  merely  does  
itself  a disservice,  that it is much  more  promising  for a child  of 
three  years  to preside  over the affairs  of a town,  than that a 
town  which  hates  strangers  enjoy  a particle  of progress.  I can 
never forget  the palace  of that king, for the king of Igbo 
Olodumare  tpok  exceeding  good  care  of me.
I had now lived in that palace  for six months,  my wife 
was three months  pregnant  with my first-born,  Akara-ogun,  
when  I prepared  myself  one morning  and took myself  into the 
forest to hunt. By this time, I had earned  myself  my first 
elephant  kill.
My wife accompanied  me some  way, and when it was 
time for her to return,  she pleaded  that I should  not stay too 
long away  sp that her eyes would  not begin  to ache from my 
absence.  She blessed  me for hunters'  luck, and made  a special  
request:  if I encountered  the bush-fowl,  1 should  please  kill one 
for her, as she had a craving  for the taste of the bush-fowl.  
Don't we all know that when a woman  is pregnant,  she 
undergoes  important  body  changes?  Not all food appeals  to 
them, and any husband  who fails to take good care of the 
pregnant  has no place  among  the ranks  of the humane,  he is






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SOI
the kind we describe  as a viper  in the skin of an earthworm.  A 
venomous  snake is the viper, but the earthworm  slithers  
peacefully  about  his business.  Because  of this, I always  took  
excellent  care of my wife at this time. I pampered  her, and 
when  she asked  that I bring  back  a bush  fowl, I resolved  to run 
down  that bird to the very summit  of endeavour.  Moreover,  
when peppers  and onions meet in conference  over the 
prostrate  body of a bush-fowl,  nothing  more is lacking  in the 
world.
When  we had covered  a sufficient  distance,  I sent her 
home  saying,  'My dear  wife of well-earned  plaudits,  look after  
the home.  1 shall not be long. Prepare  a rice dish against  my 
return,  since  it was cornmeal  I had yesterday,  and yam  flour  the 
day before.  I shall do my best to bring home  venison,  and if I 
encounter  the bush-fowl,  then matters  have rallied  around  the 
teeth  of luck. If anyone  enquires  after  me, tell that person  I am 
on a brief  visit  outside  the town  borders.'
I had not walked  that much  when  I arrived  at a part of 
Igbo Olodumare  which  astonished  me greatly,  for it was there  I 
encountered  trees which had no roots,  yet they stood rigid 
and, their  leaves  were  a deep  glossy  green.  The animals  spoke  
the language  of humans,  so did the birds.  I looked  for game  in 
this bush but found nothing  whatsoever.  I saw neither  
mammal  nor bird, not even a squirrel  sprinted  up a tree in my 
presence.  1 walked  and walked,  and encountered  no living  
thing.  After  a while,  a breeze  got up, the tops of these  trees






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
began  to bow all the way to the ground,  the very  tips touched  
ground  and rose again.  The wind was powerful,  it blew hither  
and thither,  and both  trees  and buttresses  began  to collide  with 
one another.  It was a severe commotion.  Without  God's 
mercies,  a careless  tree  trunk  would  have  made  me a casualty-  
God is indeed  mighty.
After  a while, when  one of the taller  trees  took  the tuft 
of its head  to the ground  close  by me, I quickly  sat myself  on it 
before  it rose,  so that when  the wind  got up again  and the tree 
righted  itself, it was both the tree and myself  that sprang  up. 
The tree  wps  tall, if someone  spied me from  the ground,  I would  
appear  to be little bigger  than a gnat. I was most delighted  
when I ascended  to the skies because  I could see the 
environment  most  clearly:  all the leaves  were  deep  green  and 
the view was most  entrancing.  It took quite  a while  for me to 
realize  that instead  of rejoicing,  I should  in fact have been  
lamenting.  For after I had been catapulted  up, the wind fell, 
trees  remained  in their normal  positions,  no longer  bowing  to 
the ground  - if only I had known,  I would  have leapt to the 
ground  while  the wind  was active,  but now  that everything  was 
still, I was confronted  with a serious  problem.  I could  not leap 
down  from such a height,  if I tried it, certain  it was that both  
arms and legs would  be broken  into little pieces.  And the tree 
was too high, its trunk  so smooth  that no one could  dream  of 
descending  it on his own. This now sent me into deep  
cogitation,  I began  to rue my action,-wondering  how I could






THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGO  SO!
have  yielded  to such  a foolish  impulse.
Wrapped  in these  thoughts,  I saw a duiker  passing  by 
and I hailed  him. 'Ah, Mr. Duiker,  kindly  rescue  me from this 
constraint.  It was the tree that lowered  itself to the ground  
before  I sat on its top branches.  Then  the wind  got up again  and 
with it, the tree, which  is how you come to find me seated  
gingerly  at the top. May God Almighty  save you from  
imprisonment  in broad  daylight,  the Owner  of the Day will save 
you from  the dangers  that  come  from  the hunger  of the throat.  
My dear duiker,  you hold an important  ranking  among  the 
anim'^ls  of the forest,  for you are found  both white  and red, 
your  limbs  are sturdy,  and your  head  boasts  flaring  horns.  The 
farmer  who fails to honour  you will experience  the dearth  of 
yams, the farm owner  who accounts  you nothing  will continue  
to labour  in vain. With all these  in mind,  I implore  you in the 
name  of the King of Heaven  not to fail to try and extricate  me 
from my plight,  so I can take leave of this place where  I am 
presehtly  stuck.  If you succeed,  I shall never  forget you, and I 
shall lead you to a farm  where  okra is most  abundant.  You will 
feast  off it until  your  stomach  balloons  fit to burst.
When I had finished,  the Duiker replied, but his 
language  was not congenial  to my hearing.  He said, 'You who  
are perched  on a tree,  I truly  pity you in your  plight,  but there  is 
hothing  I can do for you. We duikers  do not climb  trees,  we are 
different  from  snakes  and squirrels,  neither  do we consort  with 
monkeys  and other  simians.  And then, even if I were able to






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
climb trees,  I would  still have left you here before  returning  to 
assist  you. Even  as you look  at me, I am on an errand  entrusted  
to me by the animals,  for today  is the day of their  assembly.  It is 
from little  things  that great  things  become  derailed,  the one to 
whom  we entrusted  a mission,  who  stops  to frolic  on the way, is 
a most disrespectful  being.  The recipient  of a small gift who 
fails to thank us is an ingrate,  one who sees a fellow  being  
stumble  against  an obstacle,  and does not even empathize  is 
steeped  in ignorance.  On account  of these,  I wish  to proceed  on 
my way, I am in a hurry, even though  your words  approach  
bribery  and you promise  to lead me to an okra farm, I still 
cannot  dawdle  to advise  you on your  plight.  There  is no bribery  
in the Forest  of Olodumare,  for bribery  is a crooked  path,  while  
the straight  path  shines  without  blotches.'
Not long after, I caught  a glimpse  of a passing  rabbit.  I 
made another  effort and hailed him with my voice raised;  
'Ehoro  o! and heard  him respond,  'Who  is it that shouts  my 
name  from a tree-top?'  I answered,  'It is the son of man who 
hails  you from  a treetop,  I need  you to render  me some  help  so I 
can descend  from  this treetop  roost.  A wind  got up and the tree 
fell to the ground,  but then the wind dropped  completely,  and 
the tree regained  its heights  while I rose with it . But now, 
finding  my way down has become  a problem.  The moment  I 
saw you however,  I regained  confidence,  because,  what  animal  
in the forest  will claim  that he does  not know  you, dear  Rabbit?  
You are not like those without  a conscience,  for when the






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE;  CONGO  SOI
conscience  is gone,  even if such a person  does evil, he has no 
means  of knowing  that it is evil he has embarked  upon.  When  
you encounter anyone  who conducts  himself  without shame, 
the inner  eye of that  individual is completely  smashed.  But you, 
worthy  Rabbit,  the eye of your  conscience  is clarity  itself.  Your 
status  is secure  in the animal  kingdom.  You can outrace  most  
others,  and your ears are not smaller  than others'  if we 
examine  them  in proportion  to your  body.  With  all this in mind,  
advise me on the way  to extricate  myself  from  this precariously  
perch.'
It was with such sweet  words  that I cajoled  the rabbit,  
but his reply  was no music  to my ears. 'Words  which  are soft as 
the red banana,'  he began,  'deserve  better  than a response  as 
hard  as shiny pebbles  in the stream.  Your  words  please  me, you 
stranger,  and but for the errand  on which  I have been sent, I 
would  have stayed  by you and ensured  that you descended  
from where  you are suspended  on the tree-top.  However,  do 
not let this predicament  make  you despair,  for there  are others  
who  follow  me and, if you do not dilly-dally,  and you speak  to 
them  in the same  manner,  I have no doubt  that a solution  will 
be found. I do however  implore  you, do not behave  like 
countless  others,  who see themselves  as all-knowing,  and fail 
to seek  advice.  These  are the kind who  wrap  themselves  in the 
cloth of stinging  nettles,  a dire condition  sticks to them like 
glue,  and while  they  continue  to smile  before  humanity,  sorrow  
sits comfortably  in an arm-chair  in the recesses  of their  hearts.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
So, do excuse me while  I proceed  on my business,  for it is today  
that the caucus  of animals  sit in council  - indeed,  it was they  
who  sent me on an errand,  and  whoever  desires  to attain  a ripe 
old age does not fool around  with affairs  of elders. Accept  my 
commiseration,  dear killer of elephants,  I greet  you for your  
troubles,  good-bye  for now, may your head bring you safely  
down  from  where  your  act of foolishness  has hoisted  you.'
When  the rabbit  had delivered  these  words,  he broke  
into a sprint  and began  an energetic  dialogue  with his legs, 
leaving  me on my lonesome  on the tree-top,  my lips parched,  
my mouth  dessicated,  my stomach  flattened,  my eyes bulging  
like eggs. I was suspended  from  the tree, for all the world  like 
an ourang-outang.  I aped a gorilla  while my mind travelled  
home  with thoughts  of friends, while  anxiety  for my wife took  
hold of me, I suffered  six hundred  torments,  underwent  eight  
hundred  humiliations,  I sucked  in the heavy  air of self-pity,  
contorted  my face in pain,  looked  up, looked  down, I meditated  
for eternity,  yet no solution  appeared  on the horizon.
Not long after, a bush rat passed  the same  way. It was 
with great  effort  that I was able  to recognize  that it was indeed  
he, for the distance  between  us was vast and everything  
accordingly  reduced  in size. I hailed  him - Ekute  o! - and he 
responded,  'Who  is it that calls me from  the top of the tree, I, 
the wayfarer  of the forest,  who  ramble  from  roots  to tree-tops.'
I replied  him, 'It is I, Olowo-aiye,  son of Akowediran,  husband  to 
Ajediran,  tamer  of elephants,  I who came  to hunt in the forest






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE;  GONGO  SOI
but whom  you now find trapped  in a tree. I implore  you, you 
bush rat who cavorts  all over the place.  There  is none who is 
accounted  small in the eyes of the Lord except  the conniving  
type who invites  the thief  to raid the farm, then  summons  the 
farm owner  to set guard  on his farm.  The farmer  thanks  him, 
but judgement  day awaits  the conniver  in the other  world.  You, 
bush rat of Igbo Olodumare,  you are tiny only in the eyes of 
man,  even  though  you are bigger  than  the wild rodent  of other  
places.  Nonetheless,  there  is one thing  I would  like to impress  
on you - you are not insignificant  in the eyes  of God.  You are no 
hypocrite  who  stores  blood  within  himself  but discharges  white  
spittie,  not one who praises  others  to their faces but insults  
them behind  their backs.  My dear bush rat, permit  me to teil 
you a iittle  story.
Once,  a double-dealer  and I belonged  in the same  club.  
When  we observed  that one of our members  was bringing  the 
dub into disrepute,  we all resolved  to expel  him. No sooner  had 
we dispersed  that the two-faced  dissembler  went  secretly  to 
this man and informed him that he had no hand in our decision.  
In the end, our society  came to know of his game,  and he was 
covered  in utter shame.  My beloved  bush rat, you do not 
belong  in that  company, and  so i implore  you, do not fail to deal 
honestly  with me this day, fail not to deal with me with the 
truthfulness  of your mind, tell me now, in plain words,  what  
•means  I must deploy  to free myself  from this confinement.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
where  a foolish  act has landed  me in the cleft  of a tree/
Thus did I speak  to the bush rat and he replied  in the 
following  words:  'Hunter  perched  on a tree-top,  I thank  you for 
the kind words  you have uttered  about  me. I counsel you to be 
a little patient.  It was patience  that took present  leaders  to 
their  present  position,  patience  was the weapon  of the leaders  
that  ensured  that  they  did not mislead  their  followers,  patience  
is the reason  that  the King  of Heaven  has not utterly  destroyed  
the children  of earth  in their  thousands.  Today  happens  to be 
the convention day of the beasts  of the forests,  where  all types  
in the animal  world gather  to debate  the condition  of their  
existence.  It was hunger  that chased  me out of the gathering,  
for once huhger  is eliminated  from labour,  it spells the end of 
hardship.  However,  pay attention  to the words  I am about  to 
say to you: hundreds  of people  have behaved  exactly  the way<  
you have, and just as many have perished  on the tree-top.  
When  the great  convention is over,  you will hear  the sound  of a 
gong.  After  that  gong,  you will experience  a powerful  wind,  this 
wind will be even more  powerful  than the earlier  one. That is 
the moment  to seek your escape.  This wind is however  
extremely  powerful,  so that the trees  that sway  to the ground  
also swing  back into position.  Please,  take good care that the 
swaying  trunks  do not hit you on the head,  that  the branches  
do not smash  the back of your head lest your  skull be cracked,  
and all your brain matter  spattered,  and yourself  turned  into a 
wayfarer  to heaven.  What  I have to say does not exceed  this.






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SOI
Now I must proceed  on my hunt for sustenance.  When  I am 
done,  I shall pass  this way  again  to see how  you've  fared.  Good ­
bye for now, again I salute you in your turmoil,  may your  
Creator  fail not to bring you down from this unwanted  
elevation.'
His counsel  over, I offered  him my thanks.  'I thank  you 
bush rat, may God guard  your  secrets,  may Olodumare  protect  
your  children  for you. Your  words  have  come  through  clearly  to 
me, I heard  you, I shall await  the gong,  I shall prepare  for the 
wind, and I shall protect  the back of my skull against  the 
approach  of any tree. You also, do take good  care, walk  gently.  
True indigenes  of a land tread it gently,  it is strangers  who 
trample  the land with  violence.  Take  care  to evade  traps  set for 
you,  for if the trap snaps  on a vital spot,  it is no laughing  matter  
- if it catches  you on the head,  the head is smashed,  if on the 
limb,  the limb is severed  and turns  the owner  a paraplegic.  Do 
take care Ekute, remember  me to your neighbours.  When I 
have succeeded  in regaining  solid earth,  I shall seek out your  
hole, but if I am never  reunited  with earth,  it means  we may 
never  renew  acquaintance.'
When I was done, the bush rat returned  to his way, 
looking  for the day's fodder,  leaving  me again on my own,  
roosting  on the top of a tree.
After  a while,  I began  to hear  the sound  of a gong,  which  
signaled  that the animal  convention  was over. I quickly  seated  
myself  securely,  tied myself  with  a climber  to the tree in which  I






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
was lodged,  awaitingthe  violent  wind  of which  the bush  rat had 
warned  me. Little did I know  that the climber  I had used as a 
belt sprouted  from another  tree. When  the wind rose and the 
tree in which  I was seated  began to sway  to the ground,  that  to 
which  the climber  belonged  remained  upright  while I found  
myself  suspended  in the air. i remained  thus, between  earth  
and sky until my own tree completed  its obeisance,  and began 
its journey  back.  The moment  it regained  its vertical  position,  I 
wasted  no time in extricating  myself  from the other  and re­
attaching  my body  to the right  tree. So when  my tree bowed  a 
second  time,  i was ready;  the moment  it touched  ground,  I 
leapt  off before  it could  begin  its return  journey.
When  I finally  touched  ground,  1 was exceedingly  tired,  
for I had stayed  a long while  on the tree, hunger  had collapsed  
my stomach,  so I carefully  sat down  some  distance  and rested.
Not long after, I began  to hear the tumult  of a crowd  
behind  me, and when  I glanced  in that direction,  I saw all kinds  
of creatures  of the animal  world,  clearly  returning  from the 
convention  and coming  in my direction.  They all seemed  to 
head  toward  me. I was  terrified,  I did not dare  to shoot  at any of 
them,  there  being  such numerous  and powerful  beasts among  
them. Quickly,  I seized my gun and took flight. What now 
alarmed  me however  was that it did appear  that no matter  in 
what  direction  I moved,  the creatures  also followed  suit. It was 
as if they were all after me, little did I know  that they were  
merely  minding  their own business,  but that was the way it






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SO!
appeared  to me at the time.
As I kept running  helter-skelter,  I spied a thick  buttress  
root, filled with all kinds of fallen debris,  it seemed  to have  
sprung  from  a sprawling  walnut  tree. I quickly  plunged  into the 
cluttered  undergrowth.  When  I eventually  emerged,  my head 
was full of all kinds of dried leaves  as well as the rubble  of 
peeled  barks.
I rested  a little.  While  resting,  I raised  my head  and saw 
some  huge  birds  flying  across  the sky. I fired  and downed  one of 
them.  I lit a fire and roasted  it, eating  it to the last sliver  of flesh.  
'Next  I went  to where  a little  stream  cascaded  over  a rock. I used  
a broad  leaf  to gather  some  water  and drank  of it.
I remained  there  a while,  then stood up and began  to 
seek  the path back  to my abode  in the home  of the king of Igbo 
Olodumare  but could discover  no sign of the way. Backwards 
and forwards  I walked,  but there  was nowhere  that remotely  
resembled  a familiar  route.  This was the manner  in which 1 
continued  until darkness  covered  me in the Forest  on that day. 
Let me not pursue  the matter  like the mat unrolling  on the 
ground  -1 want  all the people  on earth  to know  that it was in 
'this manner  that I became  lost in the Forest for the full 
reckoning  of three  years.
At the time I speak of, I could not speak of this 
experience  to a living soul, it was difficult  for my hand to 
transmit  the tale to the people  of the world,  all the strange  and 
profound  events  that my eyes witnessed,  that my ears heard.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
that I underwent,  encounters  that became  routine.  True,  even  
though  anyone  who has weighty  matters  within  him, yet lacks  
an audience,  is akin to a starving  man who sees food that is 
forbidden  him, nevertheless,  it is not everything  that befalls  
the mature  that  the mature  can reveal.  I shall therefore  speak  
of just a little of the events  that happened  to me during  these  
three years before  other occurrences  push them from my 
mind.
For a solid year,  fruits  served  as my main  diet. I hunted  
till I ran out of gunpowder,  but the game  that I succeeded  in 
killing  while it lasted  served  me very well indeed.  When  the 
gunpowder  was exhausted,  I set traps  along  the trail of game  
and also used my machete  to slash at fish in streams,  
nonetheless,  it was fruits to which I mainly  resorted  in the 
forests  for my sustenance.
I turned  a cave into my home  after  a while,  and began  to 
live in it. I transformed  that cave, dividing  it into separate  
chambers.  The bedroom  stood on its own. 1 gathered  
numerous  small leaves,  then plucked  broader  ones, placed  
them  on the top of the smaller  this became  my pillow.  I found  
a big boulder  and made  it serve  as a door,  then dug a hole near  
the top of the cave  to serve  as a window.  Even  though  the cave 
was mostly  framed  by rock,  a part  of it was packed earth,  and it 
was within this that I gouged  out my windows.  Some big 
animals  had preceded  me to the cave but the moment  I put in 
appearance,  they  all fled.






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SOI
As I wandered  around  the forest,  I found numerous  
E snails,  their  shells  served  as containers  for water  -1 lined  them  
up in an orderly  fashion  in my cave.  This was how I utilized  the 
little knowledge  that I had acquired  in my life time, and 
i managed my  existence  with  a semblance  of normality.
About  the eighth  month  of my sojourn  in this forest,  a 
I heavy  wind  arose.  It was a heavy  storm  and much  of the sky was
littered  with flying  debris.  As I surveyed  the cloud  of objects,  I 
noticed  a corn cob. I began  to follow  it with my eyes to see 
where  it would  land. When  it did land, it fell on a tiny stream  
which began  to carry it off. I gave chase  to the cob until its 
progress  was stopped  and it rested  against  a tangled  growth  on 
the river  - it was there  that I reached  out and grabbed  it. The 
reason  for my pursuit  was that I wanted  to examine  it, just in 
case it could  provide  a clue as to its origin  which, hopefully,  was 
not too distant.  That  way I might  obtain some  signs  that would  
guide  meoutofmyconfinement.
I examined  this husk thoroughly  but found no sign 
whatsoever  that  suggested  that  the corn had been  carried  from  
a nearby  place,  all the signs  I read indicated  that  it belonged  to a 
: breed that was cultivated  in a far distant  place from Igbo
Olodumare.  However,  there was a consolation:  my careful  
inspection  of the husk revealed  the presence  of one dried,  
solitary  grain.  I thought  long  about  this,  wondering  what  I codid  
do with this meagre  object, failing,  I prayed,  'Piease,  Almighty,  
' lend me some  wisdom  regarding  this stray  object.'  After  which,  
I took  the cob with me into my cave  and slept.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
At daybreak,  it was as if even  though  my spirit  had slept,  
my mind had not, it had been kept occupied  by the corn, for 
even so does a problem  on which  we cogitate  find its solution  
when one has slept a little and the mind has rested.  The 
moment  I woke, my mind informed  me that I should  clear a 
little land and plant  the seedling.  I wasted  no time in carrying  
this out. After a while,  the seed germinated.  As if playing  its 
own game, it grew and matured,  eventually  producing  two 
hefty  ears of corn.  When  they had ripened,  I did not eat them  
but kept  them  till they  had dried  — and the two ears were  truly  
bursting  with grain.  When  the rainy  season  returned,  I planted  
all the seeds  on the farm I had by now enlarged  and the seeds 
all fructified.  I began  to feast  on them.
Mind  you, anyone  who  chanced to meet  me at this time  
would  not have recognized  me in the least.  The clothes  on my 
back  were  caked with dirt - true, I did wash them  in the stream  
but I had no soap. I washed  myself  but I had no sponge.  The 
worst part of it however  was that my head of hair was 
overgrown,  and my beard  was so full that both had joined  up 
and my eyes glistened  from some dark interior  as if both  
sources  of hair had built a house  to contain  them. When I 
visited  a nearby  stream  and stared  at my face  - for this stream  
served  as a mirror-when  I looked  in the depths  of the water  
and beheld  my face, I was indeed  frightened,  for there  was no 
difference  worth remarking  between  a gorilla and myself.  
After  giving  some  thought  to the matter,  I realized  that it was






I
THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGOSOI
not one's  appearance  in the eyes  of others  that  leads  to care  for 
one's body, but that the self takes pleasure  in its own 
appearance.  Anyone  who  gives  time  to body  care  solely  to earn 
the approbation  of others  is no more  than  a slothful  being.
For this reason, I resolved  to take care of my 
appearance.  I had no knife whatsoever,  only a machete,  I 
therefore  undertook  its sharpening.  I honed  it for an entire  day 
until its blade  was razor  keen.  Then  I began  to shave  my beard  - 
whatever  fits the occasion is what  we use to meet  the occasion;  
a machete  is a difficult  tool  for shaving,  a knife  is what  befits  the 
chin. I underwent  a lot of trial before  I could  lop off a portion  of 
the beard.  However, it was  only  the beard  to which  I could  apply  
the machete  - love it or hate  it -1 had no choice  but to leave  my 
head of hair alone and continue  to carry it thus wherever  I 
went.
Leaving  aside  the problem  of the hair  on my  head  and on 
my chin, by, the time I had sojourned  a while  in the bush, my 
mind  was no longer  downcast,  for our elders  say that  no matter  
how  one's  status  in life suffers  setback,  one must  still make use 
of his position as is befitting.  It is a madman  who  says  that he is 
finished in this world  - as long  as there  is life, there  is hope;  my 
thoughts  at this time counselled  that, albeit I found myself  
alone,  life was still within  me, my knowledge  was different  from  
those  of the forest  beasts,  and the same  God who planted  a 
mouth  in my head  would  not fail to find the means  to fill it with






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
the necessary.  Thus did I resolve  in my mind that if it was 
indeed  in this condition  that I was fated  to spend  the rest of my 
life, I would still endeavour  to pass that time with joy and 
gratitude,  but if my Creator  indeed  had not thus decreed,  then  
the day of my salvation  was only  a matter  of time.
And now  there  came  an incident,  three  years after  I had 
lost my way in the Forest, and this was what  took  place.  On this 
day, I had gone into the forest  to seek fruits.  I found  a lot of 
tortoises  but found  no snails at all, it so being  that snails  in this 
forest were bigger than tortoises,  and furthermore,  the 
tortoises  were smaller  than the ones to which we are 
accustomed.  It was not very  long into my perambulations  that 
a rainstorm began.  I had not yet regained  my sanctuary,  so I hid 
in a small  hole. The rainfall  was however heavy,  and the wind  
severe.  It did not take long before  the torrent  flooded  my 
hideout  and I had to seek  another.  I was again chased  out of this 
second  refuge,  it was a storm the like of which I had not 
experienced  since  I lost my way  into  this area.
After  a while,  it stopped,  I hurried  to my cave,  but found  
on arrival  that a heavy  tree had fallen  across  the entrance,  also 
knocking  the rock  out of the way. When  I peeped  into the hole,  
it was completely  water  logged.  From the outside,  to which  I 
was now restricted,  I could  do little but stare  at my snail shells  
which  served  for water  storage  and tortoise  shells  which  I used  
for plates,  all floating  about  like boats  and canoes.  The most  
painful  part of it was that my fire had quenched.  I had only  one






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGO  SO!
matchstick  left in my matchbox  before  I set out, that stick had 
been so thoroughly  soaked  that its head had peeled  off and 
was washed  away.  This last made  me so dejected  that I nearly  
cast away hope altogether.  1 cried out in a penetrating  voice,  
'My  fate is now  in your  hands,  0 God  I'
I thought  for a while,  but could  not think  of anything  to 
do, so I picked  up my hunting  sack,  took up my gun and set my 
head  into  the forest.
Awhile  later,  I broke  into a plantation  of fruit  trees  which  
were  filled  with  all kinds  of luscious  fruits,  the like of which  1 had 
not encountered  for food  since  I lost my way in the forest.  1 saw 
pawpaws,  oranges,  pineapples,  red plantains,  and several 
other  fruit  trees  - all manners  of fruits  from  the four  corners  of 
the world  were present  on this patch.  I-looked  round  to see if 
there  was anyone  who laid claim  to this orchard  but saw no sign 
to suggest  that it belonged  to anyone,  and since all kinds of 
unusual  things  were  to be found  in the Forest  of Olodumare,  I 
concluded  that the orchard  existed  to cater to the needs  of 
those  who  found  themselves  lost in the forest I settled  down  to 
eat. When  I had feasted  and was  thoroughly  sated,  I planted  my 
back  against  a tree and slept.
The sun penetrated  deeply  into my body  since  1 was  fully 
exhausted  before  I fell asleep,  and no sooner  had I begun  a 
most agreeable  dream  than I was awakened  by someone.  
When  I opened  my eyes  to loolcat  this person,  it turned  out to 
be a good-looking  young  man who was additionally  dressed  in






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
white,  he wore  a white  cap and his trousers  were  also white.  I 
greeted  him and he returned  the courtesy.  Next he queried,  
'What  are you looking  for in our orchard?',  to which  I retorted,  
'The orchard  belonging  to how many  of you?'  He replied,  'My 
father's  orchard.'  Thereupon  I followed  with: 'And who is this 
father  that gave birth to you?' He replied,  'A father  who is 
greater  than  the fathers  some  other  people  can boast of.' This 
provoked  me to retort,  'Even  if the father  that  gave  birth  to you 
is greater  than  the fathers  of some  others,  yours  cannot  hold a 
candle  to mine,  I therefore  implore  you, let me know  just  who  is 
this father  of yours.  I was  fathered  b>/Akowediran,  the father  of 
Akowediran  is Idakeroro-ode.  Idakeroro-ode  was more than  
sufficient  father  for Akowediran.  Akowediran  was sufficient  
father  for me, Olowo-aiye,  thus there  exists  no father  greater  
than he who is my father.  I therefore  ask you, in all sincerity,  do 
not fail to let me know  of this great man who had you as his 
son.'
When  I had addressed  him in this manner,  the young  
man took  a long look  at me, hissed  but made  no reply.  Instead  
he turned  his face  from  me and began  to walkaway  as if he was 
on his way to report  me to some  powerful  person  who would  
return  with  appropriate  chastisement  for my  transgression.
However,  after a while, with my eyes turned  in the 
direction  of the route  along  which  he had disappeared,  I looked  
around  my surrounding  and observed  that some  sounds  had 
arisen,  little realizing  that it was the sound  of a breeze.  When






I"
THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SOI
the breeze  reached  my resting  place,  I found  myself  caught  in 
yet another  round  of turbulence,  impossible  to describe.  Tree 
trunks  smashed  into one another,  roots  and buttresses  against  
one another,  leaves  covered  the face of the sky, palm fronds  
flew about  in disarray,  trees rocked  backwards  and forwards,  
several  boughs  falling right beside  me. I was still absorbing  this 
turn of events  when rain began  to fall, soaking  me until my 
teeth  began  to chatter.  I crawled  beneath  the undergrowth  but 
there  was no respite.  I fled into the hollow  of a tree, still the 
rain flagellated  my body. My clothes  were thoroughly  soaked 
and stuck  to my body.  It was at this point  that 1 began  to doubt  if 
I still had anything  to achieve in this world,  my heart  sank  into a 
depression  and all kinds of dire thoughts  began to course 
through  my mind.  It seemed  as if 1 should  simply  take my own 
life.
It was while  wrapped  in this inner  turmoil  that I looked  
out and saw a massive  rock. Quickly  I ran to the rock. When  I 
arrived  there,  I noticed  a narrow  entry,  like a hole, but it led 
into a passage.  I entered  this passage,  hoping  that, perhaps,  I 
would  find a corner  in which  to hide my head - imagine  my 
astonishment  when I found  myself  in a large hall, and on^ of 
surpassing  opulence.  Since the days of my wanderi,ng  in this 
world,  I had never  encountered  such an edifice  - it surpassed 
even that of the palace  of the king of Igbo Olodumare.  At the 
four  corners  of the hall were  lined  by some  tiny birds,  rather  like 
the linnet,  in orderly  parade.  They  were  numerous-they  mustI
’ I I
f
[
i
I*
!
I
' i
I






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
have numbered  at least a thousand.  If one did not look 
carefully,  one would  never  imagine  that  they  were  live, not one 
of them budged,  each stood  still in its own place.  These  birds  
were  dazzling;  they  were bright  as gold while  their  chests  were  
silvery, their beaks  like the ivory of an elephant's  tusks.  As I 
stood  watching  them,  I heard  them burst  into song in unison,  
singing  the praises  of the almighty.  It was a most  euphonious  
song,  so sweet  to the ear that I forgot  where  I was, forgot  the 
tribulations  I had undergone,  my mouth hung  open  and it only 
lacked  a little  for it to begin  to drool.
As I listened  to this delightful  song, I saw a door open  
from  the side of a wall, a door  that I had failed  to notice  when  I 
first entered.  When I gazed in that direction,  my eyes 
encountered  a lion that truly afflicted  one with fear. When I 
turned  to flee, I could  no longer  see the entrance  by which I had 
entered.  I ran backwards  and forwards,  I did not know  what  
was the next step to take, so I inserted  myself  into one of the 
corners  and awaited  my fate at the jaws of this lion. Its body  
was pure bronze,  with a penetrating  brilliance,  it was indeed  
beautiful.  It was a surprise  to me that  when  this lion was within  
six feet  of me, it stopped  and let out a roar, its voice  resounding
as one might  conceive  of nineteen  thousand  thunders,  striking  
simultaneously.
A short  while  after,  I saw a most  lovely  woman  emerge,  
she came  towards  me and I observed  that all kinds  of unusual  
beings  followed  her, they were indeed  most attractive,  their






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGO  SOI
skin was cool and lustrous  like the skin of a newly  delivered  
child,  even so was their apparel,  luminous  as the midday  sun. 
When  the woman  had moved  nearer,  reaching  the point  where  
the lion stood,  she spoke:  'You,  lion of the Creator, lion of brass,  
you that are charged  with guardianship  of the gate to the 
resting  place  of the dead,  make  way  for me. I took  permission  of 
the King of Heaven  before  I left the precints  of heaven.  I have 
arrived  at the dark river which is the river of indigo,  I have 
traversed  the red river  which  is the river  of blood,  I have  spoken  
to innumerable  dead who are awaiting  the judgement  of 
heaven.'
When the woman  had spoken  these words,  the lion 
pulled  back.  The woman  then pulled  out a huge  parchment  and 
showed  it to the lion-would  you know  it?-this  was the letter  
of authority,  with God's seal, and once she unfurled  this 
parchment,  the earth  shook,  split open,  and the lion took his 
leave  along  that  chasm.
When the lion had vanished  completely,  the woman  
entered  the chamber  where  I was, she and her train of the 
beautiful  ones.  When  I looked  keenly  at her, I recognized  her-it  
was my own mother.  I ran forwards  to embrace  her, but my 
arms clutched  at nothing.  A second  time I tried again  to take 
hold of her but my hands  clutched  empty  air. When  a third  time  
I attempted  to take hold of her and encountered  only 
emptiness,  I burst  into tears,  her followers  burst  into laughter  
but my mother  began  to weep  with me. Ah, there  is no being






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
like a mother,  a woman  truly loves her offspring.  My mother  
then  said to me:
'My child, Ohwo-aiye,  my dear child. My eyes have  
followed  you all through  your  wanderings.  When  I could  bear  it 
no longer,  I asked  for leave  at the precincts  of heaven  to come  
and glimpse  you with my eyes.
'True,  the dwellers  of earth  have  great  knowledge,  even 
so are the dwellers  in heaven  endowed  with great  wisdom,  but 
there is no earthly  creation  or heavenly  being who knows  
where  the key to a mother's  love is kept, except  the God 
Almighty.  The child who disrespects  its mother  has broken  the 
fifth commandment  of God, he has indeed  pulled  the smock  of 
troubles  over his head, he has spread the coverlet  of 
destruction  over his body. Olowo-aiye,  your father,  implored  
me to bring  you solace,  he asked  me to pass  on his greetings,  he 
is at peace,  he sleeps  on the hammock  of contentment  that 
God has prepared  for the departed  who used their passage  
through  the world  to great benefit.  It is the idle of humanity  
who fear hardship,  there is no hardship  in the regard  of the 
determined,  those  who become  important  in life look upon  
obstacles  as jf they count for nothing,  hills look like plains  
before  the valiant.  Be not afraid  of obstacles,  they  hold no fear 
for a true man. The trader  who sustains  losses  once and, on 
that account,  swears  she will trade no more has belittled  life; 
the farmer  who, because  a harvest  is ruined  in one season.






THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGO  SOI
swears  he will farm no more  has debased  his name,  just as the 
worker  who shirks  labour at his workplace  does evil to no one 
except  himself,  for the idle will never  stand where  people  of 
substance  are found,  he will always  share  leavings  with small  
people.  The lazy will never find a place among  people  of 
progress,  they  will for ever  be consigned  among  life's  failures.
'My dear son, it has come to my ears that you are 
married,  please  take  good  care of your  wife,  for the tongue  and 
the mouth  sometimes  quarrel,  yet we never  hear  of the tongue  
inviting  eye or nose to intervene  and resolve  its disagreement  
with the mouth.  Let no one come  between  you, else your  love  
will be like water  which  someone  had collected  in a gourd  and 
brought  home,  only  to have  the husband's  friend  take a cudgel  
and smash  it. The gourd  is shattered,  the water  gushes  out, a 
part of it flows  west,  some  east, it flows  north  and south,  and 
no one can again  scoop  it up together.  The day  that  a third  party  
inserts  himself  between  two lovers,  that love will splinter into  
six thousand  and twenty  parts,  no one can ever again piece  it 
together.
'My dear child, never let go of your conscience,  it is 
mightier  than the strongest  charm.  It is the axe with which  a 
man slices  conspiracies,  the whip  with which a man lashes  the 
hypocrite,  it is the chain  with which  a man hangs  the shirker  
from a tree. Conscience  will raise you from height  to height,  
elevate  you from one important  position  to another,  it will 
increase  your  wealth,  bless  you with  abundance  of children,  it






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
will increase  your people and make you noteworthy  
throughout  the world.  Inner  truth is what  accords  you a name  
of great  repute,  those  who have  mocked  you behind  your  back  
will come  to honour  you to your  face, those who have cursed  
you in secret  will encounter  ill-fortune  when you confront  
them,  you will trample  the murderer  under  your feet, those  
who create  setbacks  but join in commiserating  will become  
crestfallen;  those  who see success  but traduce  one will stand  
by you in time  of hardship,  the strong-headed  will become  like 
the red banana,  and the bearers  of ill-luck  will keep their  
distance.  Because  of these  things,  Olowo-aiye,  your dealings  
with all people  must  be based  on sincerity  until you shed  your  
mortal  apparel,  when  you shall  close  your  eyes  and become  like 
me, when  you shall  come  to join me on the outskirts  of heaven.
'Concerning  your wife, entertain  no fears, she has 
already  given birth to a child, and that child is no common  
being,  it is one who will raise your name  to new heights  after  
tomorrow.  That  child  will not die in infancy,  even  as he will not 
grow  into suffering.  He goes  by the name  Akara-ogun,  because  
sorcerers  will be unable  to devour  him, witches  will find it 
impossibie  to waste  him,  even  as the ones  who  worship  charms  
as deities  will fail to harm  him.
'My  son, I shallsay  no more  than  this.  The children  of the 
earth spend  time as if it will never  come  to an end, but one 
minute  more than suffices  as the norm in the outskirts  of 
heaven.'






THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE;  GONGO  SOI
Thus spoke my mother,  and when she was done, she 
handed  me an outsize  bean cake, saying,  'Here,  this is akara  
from the outskirts  of heaven,  eat of it as you engage  in your  
wanderings.  It is more  delicious  than  those  of mortal hands  and 
it cannot  be exhausted,  no matter  how often and how much  
you eat of it, but the moment  you regain  your home,  I shall 
retrieve  the rest from  you.'
When  my mother  had fallen  silent,  I exclaimed  in turn,  
'Oh mother,  what nature  of love can match  this? One who 
abandoned  the pleasures  of heavenly  environs  to seek me out 
in the inclement  world. To what can 1 compare  you, dear 
mother?  You who had prospered  in earthly  abode,  have also 
prospered  in the heavenly.  When  you were in this world,  you 
cared  for me as was befitting,  you played  with me as a mother  
should,  and you punished  me as was necessary;  you never  
spoke ill of my father  to my hearing  as is the habit of some  
women,  you never  spoke  ill of me outside  the home.  If I did a 
little thing  for you, it acquired  the greatest  value  in your eyes 
and you spread  the news  to all that would  listen.  You ensured  
that 1 did not fall into disgrace  among  my peers,  you guarded  
my secrets  among  friends,  and never  did I request  anything  of 
you to which  you turned  a deaf  ear. You did not starve  me of my 
father's  company,  you did not betray my secrets before  
strangers,  you did not complain  of my father  in the home  of 
your mother,  in order  to bring  shame  upon  him in the house  of 
his in-laws.  Never  once did I hear  you hurl insults  at my father.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
nor curses,  even as you shared  nothing  in common  with those  
malcontents  of womanhood  who  boast  with such overweening  
arrogance  that there  is no action  that their husbands  can take 
against  them.  You, mother,  just as God never  deserted  you on 
earth,  even  so will he stay by you in heaven.  When  the fire dies, 
it covers its face with ashes, I shall cover your face most  
befittingly.  When the plantain  dies, it leaves its shoots  as 
substitute,  I shall be The Crown-of-Replacement  to honour  
your passage.  Just as the moon  spreads  its light all over the 
world,  even  so will your  name  glow  throughout  the cities  of the 
world.  I shall not forget  your admonitions,  the path that you 
and my father  had set for me is the very path I shall follow,  the 
love  that  you had for each other  will be an example  to me, and I 
want  you to know  that it will be much  easier  for my mouth  to 
forsake  food,  that my hand  forget  the morsel  it holds,  than for 
me to forget  all you have  done  for me.
'And so, goodbye,  dear mother,  since it is unavoidable  
that  we part this day, you being  no longer  among  the living  but 
among  the dwellers  of heaven.  Take my greetings  to my father,  
the worthy  Akowediran,  do not forget me, plead with my 
Creator  to make  well my path. Godspeed,  dear mother,  be on 
your way, and into the abode  of the dead.  Continue  to enjoy  
your rest from the travails  of the world,  take yourself  from  the 
tribulations  of the living.  On the day that death  shuts  my eyes,  
we shall  again  exchange  sight  of each  other.'
In these  words  did I address  my mother  and as I spoke.






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SO!
these  supernatural  presences  began  to vanish,  one by one,  and 
when  I looked  my mother  in the face,  she began  to cry, but the 
tears that fell from her eyes were like drops of blood. My 
mother  was weeping  the travails  of child bearing.  My head  
swelled,  my heart  repudiated  the world,  it was no longer  a part ,, 
of it, for it was indeed  from the day of her death that I 
understood  that there is no compassionate  heart like a 
mother's,  and it is very  few people  that can stand  in for one's  
father.  i
No wonder,  when my mother  turned  to leave, I again 
rushed  at her  to hold her but my hand  seized  hold  of emptiness.
Again  I tried but I embraced  emptiness.  The  third  time,  when  I !' 
saw it was all futile,  I gave a loud cry of despair  and pleaded:
'Please,  mother,  take me with  you, take me with  you'.  After  her 
departure,  I saw that she had left me a beautiful  robe and 
trousers.  1 put them on, folded  up my drenched  clothes  and 
placed  them  in my sack.
My advice to the children  of this world is this: let 
everyone  take good care of his parents,  not many can truly  
stand in as one's  father  or mother.  When  one's parents  have ^ 
finally departed,  one is bereft, left with only one's Maker. 
Therefore  when the parents  are still alive, let us look after i 
them,  that they  may ripen,  poised  and dignified.  When  we are 
pounding  the yam and turning  the eba of funerals,  we are t 
merely  throwing  away  good money  - those  who are gone  are 
gone. Let us therefore  spend  that money  when  we can keep
I
I
i
________ _ . #






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
them alive. Splurging  at funerals  cannot  bring back the dead,  
no matter  how reverential  we are towards  their memory.  
Excessive  spending  merely  reveals  our stupidity,  making  us no 
better  than  the ourang-outang,  the father  of monkeys.
After  my mother  had left, I took  the bean cake she had 
given me and left the tunnel  of rock. Just as I emerged,  I saw 
the same  white-robed  man whom  I had encountered  before  I 
entered  the chambers  of the rock. He greeted  me warmly  and 
informed  me that his boss would  like to see me, and when I 
asked  for his boss'  name,  he replied  that I would  find out when  I 
encountered  him, that he would  himself  tell me what  I sought  
to know.  So I followed  him.
We walked  a little distance  in this forest,  and arrived  at 
an enclosure  that was strikingly  well kept. When my guide  
opened  the door to this compound  and we entered,  I saw a 
wide road that opened  up magnificently  towards  an edifice  in 
the distance.  We followed  this road until we arrived  at the 
house,  and when  I looked  around,  I saw that house  itself  stood  
on a rock and that its walls were made  entirely  of stone.  The 
man opened  the door, I entered,  and he followed.  Arrived  in 
the interior,  I was fearful  of placing  my feet on the floor  since  it 
looked  so exquisite,  dazzling  the eye, but I followed  the man.  
The house was, I now realized,  a storey building,  and when we 
had walked  some  eighteen  feet, I saw a ladder  that was used  to 
gain entrance  into the upper  floor.  The man began to climb  and 
I followed  him. When  we had reached  the top, he turned  right






THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  CONGO  SOI
> and I followed.  Six feet further,  he turned  left and so did I. 
Another  six feet and he turned  right  again,  I followed  him,  then  
we came  to a short ladder  and when he began  to climb it, I 
i climbed  after  him. When  we reached  the top, I found  myself  on 
a roof  terrace  that  was made  entirely  of stone.  At the centre  of 
the floor sat a huge man, completely  bald, but whose  beard  
was so copious  that it covered  half  the floor. He was smoking  a 
I huge pipe. Unless 1 wish to lie, this man filled me with 
trepidation  - instinctively  I prostrated  myself,  like it or not, and 
began  to bob my head  up and down  - oh no, I was not about  to 
pull down  trouble  on my head.
The man invited  me to rise. His mouth  opened  and he 
began  to speak:  'Rise, son of man, I am known  as the Furry-  
Bearded-One,  who resides  at the promontory  of the rock. It is 
quite a while since 1 took up residence  here, over three  
thousand  years. I live here at the very ends of the earth,  the 
wall that surrounds  my home  separates  me from  the dwellers  
of heaven.  Within  this compound  however  you will find many  
dwellers  of heaven  with whom  we socialize.  When  you have 
eaten,  I shall take you to the home  of a most  important  Spirit,  
whose  name is Death,  for even as he keeps a home at the 
borders  of heaven, so does  he keep  one at this halfway  outpost  
between  heaven  and earth.  When  we have paid our courtesy  
visit to Death,  we shall visit his wife - for she keeps  a separate  
home, a Spirit whose name is Disease,  a most depressing  
personality.  She  is actually  related  to me on the mother  side.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'The father  of this woman  is extremely  rich and she has 
been spoilt right from childhood.  No one could be found  to 
marry  her among  humans,  so a ghommid  did eventually,  and 
took her off to the borders  of heaven.  Her nature  was so 
malignant  that she soon planted  the seeds  of intrigue  at the 
borders  of heaven.  She is a most  arrogant  show-off  and,  thanks  
to her presence,  the dwellers  of heaven  began  to turn their  
backs  on one another.  In the end, war broke  out among  them,  
her followers  embarked  on a conflict  so intense  that  the matter  
reached  the hearing  of the King of Heaven.  When Disease  
began  to tell her side of the story to her own Maker,  such 
inappropriate  language  issued  from her mouth  that Edumare  
expelled  her from the borders.  After this, she divorced  her 
husband.  For forty-four  years.  Disease  was espoused  to Satan  
who is the King of the Realm  of Perdition,  but after only five 
months,  on the eleventh  day of the forty-fourth  year, she fled 
the Realm  of Perdition  as she found the smoke  from its flames  
much thicker  than her own. It was then that Death asked  
permission  of Edumare  to wed the woman , as a most  qualified  
helpmeet  for his own  occupation.
'Therefore,  son of man, when you have finished  your  
repast,  prepare  yourself,  there  shall be doings!  Tighten  your  
belt, for your eyes are about  to see something  momentous.  
Accept  my greetings,  I bid you a warm  welcome,  welcome  from  
your wanderings,  I salute your earthy enterprise,  your  
perambulations  in the forest depths,  your  days of plenty,  your






THE ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE:  GONGO  SOI
days of starvation.  And your  people?  Is your  wife well? I salute  
your travails  in Igbo Olodumare,  the home  of all the beings  of 
wonder  in the world. Surely you have encountered  much  
trouble,  the sun has beaten  you by day, you have turned  the 
moon  into your  lamp  at night,  but this 1 do say to you, fortitude  
is the ultimate  offering.  Once you have fortitude,  the rest is 
trivial, in the end you come to gain the most important  
possession  on the surface  of earth, which goes thus: one 
should  utilize  one's existence  not merely  for oneself,  but for 
others,  so that when  in the end, one's  eyes are finally  closed, 
the wise ones would  not fail to declare  after  his demise;  There  
was a man  who performed  to the limit  of his strength.'
Thus  spoke  the man,  and his words  penetrated  my mind.  
Then it was my turn to reply,  I sighed,  coughed  and cleared  my 
throat  so as to remove  any impediment  when I began my 
response:
'My dear respected  Furry-Bearded-One,  if only you 
could reach into my mind,  you would  find that my heart has 
been rendered  even sweeter  than the white man s sugar. I 
rejoice  that I have come  to know  you this day, and the words  
you have spoken are sunken deep in the gullies of my 
intestines.  It is astonishing  to learn  that  you are so close  to the 
outskirts  of heaven,  that only a wall separates  your  home  from  
heaven.  During  the time I shall spend  with you, I shall not carry  
my sacrifice  past the crossroads,  I shall not traverse  your  wall,  
as I have no wish  to enter  heaven  in the clear  sight  of noonday.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Concerning  your offer of food, I salute your hospitality.  
However,  I am not immediately  hungry.  When  I have rested  a 
little, I shall eat. For your enquiries  regarding  the Forest  of 
Olodumare,  I shall not lie to you, my eyes have indeed  seen  
much.  I encountered  winds  that blew so fiercely  that I nearly  
took ill, even as the sun beat me so mercilessly  my body  was 
heated  like the forge  of the blacksmith.  As for my wife, I am able 
to assure  you that I do have a wife. My people,  I also assure 
you, are all in good health.  Even though  it has been a while  
since I left them,  however,  it is the prayer  that the son of man
prays  for himself  that Edumare  grants,  one's  heart  is ultimately  
one's  own priest.
'Nonetheless,  I must  confess  that  itwas  quite  startling  to 
learn  the names  of your  neighbours,  and my hope  is that when  
we find the time, I shall go and visit them.  However,  I do not 
think  that  today  is a good  idea as night  is falling.  I think  that  you 
and I should enjoy each other's company  today, then,  
tomorrow,  we shall go visit your neighbours.  My name is 
Olowo-aiye,  my father  is called  Akowediran.  Today  is a singular  
day, a day when  a man has met his peer in encountering you, 
you revered  elder, Furry-Bearded-One,  who resided  on the 
promontory  of rocks.
When  I was done,  I prepared  to descend  the ladder,  but 
when Furfy-Bearded-One  rose, it was to further astonish  me, 
for only  then did I realize  how  copious  indeed  was his beard it






THE  ELEPHANT  HUNTER  IS LOST  IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE;  GONGO  SOI
spread  all over  the rockface.  When  the man began  to descend, I 
said to him, Furry-Bearded-One,  let me assist  you in lifting  a 
part of this beard.  He replied,  'My dear  Olowo-aiye,  why don't  
you face  what  concerns  you leave  my beard alone.'  After  this, I 
never  again  made  reference  to the beard  of the beard  owner,  I 
left the man alone  to carry  his beard  as he pleased.
We disported  ourselves  till night  time,  and my heart  was 
greatly  gladdened  at this time because,  in the first place,  it was 
a long  time  since I last had anyone  with  whom  to converse,  had 
company  with whom  saunter out and return;  secondly,  it was  
ages since I last had some decent  clothing  to wear. Since I 
arrived  at the home  of Furry-Bearded-One,  I put on the robes  
and trousers  that my mother  had left, the clothes  fitted me






THE SECOND  DAY WITH  
FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  LIVED  
ON THE ROCK  PROMONTORY
The following  morning  after our breakfast,  Furry-  
Bearded-One  reminded  me of his friends  whom  he had 
proposed  that we visit, and he suggested  that we 
should  go first to the home  of Death,  so we prepared  and went  
there.
The first matter  for astonishment  was this: entrance  to 
the home  of Death  was blood-stained  throughout,  even  to the 
leaves by the roadside,  nonetheless  Furry-Bearded-One  
advanced,  stepping  on these  blood  patches  without the least  
concern.  His beard  began to amuse  me as it swept  the ground  
right  and left, cutting  a swathe  through  the trail of blood.  At this 
point  I was without  fear of anything:  anyone  who has left the 
company  of humans  and set his head  on the road to the Forest  
of Edumare-one  who, having  reached  destination,  chose to 
start looking  for the home  of Death,/ktv  — any such being  has 
cleariy  placed  shackles  on his legs, tied a chain to his waist,  
bathed  his eyes with peppery  water  and started  looking  for 
danger  everywhere  thus  did the Furry-Bearded  One lead  while  
I, the beardless,  followed  him.
We turned  into the final approach  to Iku's home  and 
could see it from a distance.  As we came closer,  I saw seven






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  UVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
huge mounds  that reached  towards  heaven,  and they were  
made  of bones.  The first mound  was made  up of human  bones,  
the second  of animals,  the third  of reptiles,  the fourth  of fishes,  
the fifth, birds, the sixth insects,  and the seventh  flies.  
However,  this seventh  pile was not made of bones like the 
others  but of thin sinewy  threads-these  appeared  to serve  as 
their  skeletons.
As we came closer. Death himself  emerged  and 
approached  us. He was stark naked, except  for a massive  
cudget  in his left hand,  while  the right  held a human  skull,  for a 
terrible  figure is Iku, who uses a human  skull as a drinking  cup. 
As this unprepossessing  creature  emerged,  Furry-Bearded  one 
turned  to me and said, 'Behold,  a most important  figure  
approaches,  Iku, whose  home  is in midway  outpost  between  
Heaven  and Earth.'
A most off-putting  creature  is Iku, having  no strand  of 
flesh in his body, nothing  but bones.  His eyes are huge as 
serving  dishes,  moon-like,  fierce as flames,  and he rocked  
backwards  and forwards like a clump  of fruits  on a tree  branch  
being  pressed  to the ground  by a light breeze.  His teeth  were  
like a lion's  fangs, crimson  red, for Iku does  not enjoy  yams  nor 
does  he eat bananas,  he has no taste  for okra or vegetables,  he 
loves  human  flesh  more  than  anything  else in the world.
Iku came towards  us, Furry-Bearded-One  and I also 
moving  in his direction.  When  we met him, he greeted  Furry-  
Bearded-One  but ignored  me. Then  he turned  round  and faced






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMAREf !■'
' homewards  while  we followed,  he and Bearded  engaged  in a
conversation  that  excluded  me. When  we entered  his home,  I 
made  a move  to sit down, but Bearded  quickly  warned me with 
his eyes  that  I should  do no such  thing.
Two things  struck  me most forcibly  about  the house.  
The first was that the wall on my right  side was inscribed  with 
, the names  of all diseases  that are capable  of killing  the living,
I both those which  seem insignificant  in our eyes and others
j which  terrify  us - all were  fully registered,  without  exception,
i on that wall. When  I followed  the list downwards,  I read the
, following  words inscribed  in huge letters below the list:
"Insanitary  body, insanitary  home, filthy clothing,  unclean  
I food,  unhealthy breeze,  unclean  stomach,  irregular  excreting,
a carefree  attitude  at the onset  of illness"  - these  predominate
I' among  people  and lead to their  premature  exit from  the world
in the morning  and noontide  of their  existence."
^ The second  cause for astonishment  was the seven
people  whom  I met in the house;  the very positions  in which  
they  were  placed  left a lasting  impression.
The first sat on a splendid  chair,  he wore  a velvet  robe  
j and trousers,  his cap was also  velvet  and designed  like a crown,
while his shoes  .looked  golden.  His robe and trousers  were  
gorjgeous.  This man  was seated  like a king  and it astonished  me 
to find such  a grand  personage  in the home  of such a revolting  
species  of being.
L






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  LIVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
The second  was not seated  when we entered,  but after  
that he sprang  to action,  began to run around  the house.  After  
that he slowed  down  to a walk, next he sat, he was extremely  
restless, being like someone  fearful of some immense  
occurrence.  1 noticed  then that a flattish  book  was pasted  over 
his chest, on which was written:  'The motor car has no 
relations,  the railway  has no wife,  even  the motor-cycle  has no 
inhibition  with anyone;  whoever  fails to reckon  with metal  will 
go with metal.'
The third stood  on his feet. He wore new trousers  and 
clothing  but wore a cap of elders  - it was an unsightly  cap, it 
looked  like something  from antiquity.  He also had a pamphlet  
over  his chest  which  read:  'The day that  the Creator  is ready  to 
judge  humanity,  you will be cast  aside  and severe  chastisement  
will be meted  to the mighty  father  who  gave  birth  to you.'
The fourth  was a woman.  She slept on a mat, tossing  
side to side as one who was in great  agony.  Her coverlet,was  
nothing  but rags, but on the tattered  cloth was written:  'The 
dissembler  will be meted  with shame  after shame,  she will 
never be among the uplifted,  but will walk among the 
relegated  for ever.'
The fifth was on top of a ladder with several  rungs,  he 
sat on the topmost  rung  as we entered.  After  a while  however,  
he moved  to the one below,  thereafter  to the next one, and 
shortly after,  came even  further  down to the next. Some  time  
later, he resumed  his routine  of descent,  one rung at a time






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
j until,  by the time  we took  our ieave,  he was seated  on the floor.
I I noticed  the writing  on the pamphlet attached  to his chest,  it
read: 'Like a spun-out  tease,  the laggard  finds himself  among  
the relegated,  like a spun-out  tease,  the procrastinator  finds  
himself  in the other  worid.'
*' sixth was seated  on a comfortable chair,  covered  in
^ cloth, his eyes were shining,  his skin smooth,  the teeth in his
' head gleaming  white,  he was at ease, the cloth that covered
, him was rich in texture,  and he himself  was extremely
. handsome.  He was more confident  than Death  itself, and he
I seemed  to be in command  of the inhabitants  of the house.  On
I his  chest was ,the following  inscription:  'The heart of the
, truthful  is at peace  as one who has never  acted ill towards  a
fellow  being,  who never  placed  a guilty  secret  in the hands  of 
I, another  being;  the heart  of the truthful is white  as cotton  fluff,
his skin is cool like the leaves  and water,  the truthful  stands  
solid  as a hill.'
- Ir
, The seventh  was positioned  in a frightening  manner.  We
found  him within  a net made  of spun metal,  for all the world  
like a fishing  net. It had four  corners,  just like a room  specially
^ built  for him. When  we arrived,  a fire broke  out where  the man
, was, and began  to burn him. He cried  out from  time  to time,  he
groaned,  hissed  in self-pity,  his surrounds  made  one terrified  of 
the home of Iku. When the cries uttered  by this man had 
subsided  as had the fire itself,  I saw  a hand emerge  with a whip,  
yet there  was no body  attached  to the hand.  This hand  began  to
t
I
L






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  LIVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
flog the man encased  in that  cage until  the whip  was in tatters.  
The hand then reverted  to an axe. It chased  the man around  
his meshed  cage  and began  to strike  him. When  I saw  the deep  
wounds  inflicted  on the body,  from  which  blood  began  to gush
out, I becametrulyterrified,for  I distinctly  saw  the bones  on his
body.  After  the axe came  pepper  paste.  The hand applied  the 
paste  to the man's  raw wounds  and this made  the man break  
into a fresh run - my fear became  so intense  I nearly  fled the 
house. Next came boiling  water which cascaded  from the 
ceiling,  so that  the man's  skin began  to peel off in flakes.  The 
hot water treatment  ceased,  and a net descended  and 
enveloped  him - it was in this condition  that he remained  until  
we left the home of Iku, the Spirit without  inhibition  or 
deference,  he who inhabited  the halfway  outpost  between  
heaven  and earth.
Let me return  to the point  where  I digressed.  A while  
after  we remained  in the home  of Iku, the Furry-Bearded-One  
introduced me to him, saying, 'Good  friend  of mine,  Iku, whose  
home is to be found in the halfway  outpost  of heaven  and 
earth,  without  beating  around  the bush,  you would  not have 
failed  to take note of someone  who accompanied  me here. If 
we avoid  pretence,  you must  be curious  to know  what  kind of 
person  he is - that is a fact.  The man  whom  you see behind  me 
is a friend,  and he is a special  being  among  humans.  This is 
Olowo-aiye  who came  to the Forest  of Edumare  to hunt. He 
arrived  at my home  only  yesterday,  and from  the moment  of his






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
arrival,  I could  not fail to discern  that he is a famous  man among  
men. If we wished  to speak  of how reputed  he is, we would  not 
claim that he is known  among  two hundred  but would be 
compelled  to add another  six hundred.  He is one we would  
justly  address  as Olowo-aiye,  the toast of thousands.  Not to 
prolong  matters  from  the mat  to the floor,  I am indeed  happy  to 
tell you that,  from  the moment  of his arrival,  we have indulged  
in companionship  of pleasure  and delight.  However,  seeing  
that you are my friend  and neighbour  who has looked  after  me 
nine-tenths  of the time since my sojourn  here, long before  his 
arrival,  I am persuaded  that it is only  appropriate,  and befitting  
as well that I visit you together  with him, that all three  cast our 
eyesight  on one another.  For Olowo-aiye  is a man of 
importance,  while  there is no gainsaying  that you are also an 
important  spirit  being.  You are not among  those  acquaintances  
that one can ignore  - may God not brush  any among  us aside.  I 
greet  you in long absence  - it has been quite  a while  since  our 
last meeting,  I hope  you do manage  to find substance  to meet  
the needs of substance.  I also have been pursuing  the 
exigencies  of existence  along  the commands  of my Maker,  I, 
your  very special  friend,  the Furry-Bearded-One,  who lives on 
the promontory  of rocks.
Thus went  the Bearded  One's  introduction  of my good  
self and, even as he uttered  these  words,  I had forgotten  that I 
stood  in the home  of Death.  I stood  upright  as a man stands  in 
the right  of his own importance,  my hands  on my hips, as a man






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,WHO  LIVED ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
of power  stands  before  his equal. Even as my friend  spoke,  I 
had begun  to nod my head  to indicate  that I was in full accord  
with his pronouncement  it is the man who places  us on a 
podium  that urges  us to pose like a being  of great  stature,  he 
who places  a gown  of sonyon  over  our heads  already  nudges  us 
to comport  ourselves  as important  personages.  As my friend  
uttered  these  boosting  words,  1 also whispered  inaudibly  in his 
ears,  'Right  on, Furry-Bearded-One,  right  on, Furry-Beard.'
When  the man had finished  his introduction,  instead  of 
a brief  reply  from  Iku, he launched  into a long  address.  His voice  
was truly intimidating;  when I first heard it, it was as if a 
thunderclap  had shattered  the calm of the sky, and his throat  
rumbled  in anticipation  of a violent  downpour.
Iku began speaking,  'My name is Death, a most  
indispensable  Spirit  who is the messenger  of Edumare,  the axe 
of the King of Heaven  that cuts down mortals,  yanks  out the 
deepest  roots of the mightiest.  I snatch  the father  from the 
family,  take the mother  from her children,  I take the individual  
from his community.  I have  seized  the husband  from his wives,  
taken  the wife from her husband,  1 separate  lovers,  snatch  one 
friend  from the other. I have made  the socialite  off-load  his 
acquisitions,  caused the wealthy  a reversal  of fortunes,  
dimmed  the .light in the eyes of the famous.  The cock has 
crowed  on the demise  of the powerful,  1 have made the 
.beautiful abandon  earth,  at my doing,  the wisest  have  become  
•opcupants  of the coffin, I have closed  the eyes of the self-






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
important,  both stalwarts  and the aged  — men,  women,  black,  
white,  in-between  -all have  tumbled  before  me. She who  once  
sported a head-tie  turned  to one with no further  need  for that 
adornment,  the orator  in assembly  lost his voice,  and it is from  
within  the privilege that the Almighty  has conferred  upon me 
that I plunge  the children  of earth  into lamentation,  that I turn 
them into creatures  who run around aimlessly,  fling  
themselves  on the ground,  walk with downcast  eyes, smack  
their lips together  in self-pity,  weep,  sigh deeply,  yes, even I, 
the Spirit  of unmatched  consequence,  Iku, whose  home  is in 
the outpost  of the conjunction  of Heaven  and Earth.
'Being  of earth,  I thank  you this day  for the visit  you have 
paid to my home,  and wish to entrust  you with a message  to 
the people  of earth  this very  day, the sixteenth  of the eleventh
month,  nineteen  hundred  and forty years  since the death  of 
our Lord - that the children  of men pray for forgiveness,  that 
they  should  reduce  the arduousness  of my task by taking  care  
ofthemselves.
'Those  whom  you have seen in this abode  of mine,  the 
good Lord passed  them on to me — one of them does not 
actually live here, he is only on a visit today,  for his home  is in 
the outskirts  of heaven.  However,  the remaining  six are all 
mine. God ordered  me to use them as examples  to mortals  
whenever  they happen  to come into my purlieu.  Listen 
carefully  to their  histories,  and take note  of why  they  departed  
from  earth  and became  additions  to the throng  of the heavenly






THE  SECOND  DAY WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  LIVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
abode.
'The first was indeed  aged before  he left the world.  He 
committed  no evil, he bore no falsehood,  he did not soil the 
name of any of his companions,  he participated  in no plot 
against anyone,  did not visit the medicine  man in order  to ruin 
the fortunes  of another.  He never  boasted,  "what  can God do to 
me?",  he never  swore  falsely,  did not steal,  never  disrespected  
his elders, indeed he committed  no evil whatsoever.  On 
account  of these,  when  he had attained  the age of ninety  years, 
the Lord God resolved  that he should  leave  the doleful  world  to 
partake of the pleasures  of heaven.  It happens  to be today  that 
he decided  to pay me a visit and, as 1 told you earlier,  he will not 
tarry  too long  before  he returns  to the outskirts  of heaven.'
The second  departed  the world  before  it was the hour  
apportioned  him by Edumare.  He had eyes, but refused  sight.  
He had knowledge  but made  no use of it, letting  his folly ruin 
the span of his existence.  Treading  air of self-importance,  he 
would not make way for a motor  car, would not grant the 
carriage  its right of passage,  nor make  allowance  for a motor ­
cycle.  His reasoning  was  that  passers-by  would  laugh  at him. He 
sauntered  blithely  along  railway  lines,  stood  in the path of the 
timber  lorry, he toyed  with poisonous  snakes,  nor did he treat  
the scorpion  with caution,  deepest  night  was his choice  for a 
stroll, he was out of doors when the wind blew and even 
though  he could not swim,  nonetheless  made  deep  water  his 
place of relaxation.  He ate all sorts on his social  forays,  drank






)U|jji||^Hj  IN THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
^------------------------------------------------
whatever  in strange  houses,  indulged  in the most execrable  
conduct  all over  the world.  Yet, by indulging  in such behaviour,  
this man was testing  God, was mocking  God, preparing  the 
grounds  for the day of destruction.  Stemming  from this 
conduct,  one day - for the man was not one to look where  he 
was going  - a vehicle  collided  with him. He fell, and his heart  
. stopped  beating,  and of course  the Lord had ordered  that,
whoever  had lost his heartbeat  should  be brought  to him.  Thus 
, did this man close down the shutters  of his eyes, and bade
good-bye  to the world.
I 'Thethird was a gentle  person,  but his grandfather  was
' ^ more  cruel than poison,  yet God had declared  that he would
I
I not fail to impose  penalties  for the father's  sins on the son up to
I the third and fourth  generation. Thus,  whoever  chooses  to do
I' as he pleases,  his children  would come yet to reap the
consequences  the day that follows  tomorrow.  When God 
^ recalled  the heavy  sins that the grand  father  of this man had
» ’ committed,  he sent  me to bring  him hither.
'The fourth  was a beautiful  woman  while  on earth but 
, she  was also a vain,  conniving  type.  At the hefght  of her beauty,
I she  was envious  of her playmates  and would  implant  enmity
, between  two friends.  Seven  young  men wanted  her for wife,
I. and she agreed  to marry  all seven.  In the end,  she married  none
of them. The end of this matter  was that one of the suitors  did 
her harm: he afflicted  her with a most powerful  charm,  the 
I blood  in the woman's  veins  seized  up and when  her heartbeat






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  UVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
Stopped,  God dispatched  me and 1 carried  out his instructions,  
tookthe  breath  of life from  her. Great  were  the lamentations  in 
the household  of the woman.
'The  fifth was one who ruined  his life by his unconcern.  
All that happened  to him was to merely  stub his toe. However,  
through  paying  no heed,  the slight  wound  became  a sore.  It did 
not heal quickly,  and a dangerous  bug found  its way into the 
wound.  In the end, all kinds of ailments  began  to assail this 
man,  each illness  pulling  another  in its wake  but all owing  their  
origin to that tiny bug. All kinds of parasites  took the same 
route  into his head.  His brain  was infected,  it lost its compass  
and the man became  insane.  He took to wearing  rags, then  
walked  stark  naked  from town  to town,  his hair turned  brown  
like the leaves  on an unpaved  motor  road,  he slept  in the open,  
ate leaves  wherever  he found  them,  children  took to hurling  
stones  at him as he walked  by. It was in the midst  of this that  he 
took  ill. It took  a while,  but eventually  the ailment  reached  the 
point  where  his heart  stopped  beating.  I evacuated  him into 
the presence  of my Creator.
'A worthless  individual  is the seventh,  he is not among  
those  who set out to improve  the world  but rather  to cause  
distress  to its inhabitants. It was  through  manipulations  that  he 
attained  a high position.  Having  achieved  this however,  he 
constantly  blocked  the progress  of those  behind  him,  this being  
a most  deplorable  act in the eyes  of God,  and rank  behaviour  in 
the judgment  of the dwellers  of heaven  - that anyone  who has






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
enjoyed  upliftment  in life should  seek to be an obstacle  for ‘ 
those  who follow  him. This man forgot  the beings  of earth, ^ 
forgot  the beings  of heaven,  in turn, he forgot  the presence  of 
God. The worst kind of behavior  agitated  his hands  - greed  
occupied  the centre  of his heart,  and he was a creature  that 
walked  in the dark. This man wallowed  in bribery,  >he was 
chairman  of the circle  of scheming,  head  of the gang  of double ­
dealing,  field-marshal  of those  who crept about  in the dark of ! 
night.  With his mouth,  he ruined  the work  of others,  while  he 
used a big potsherd  to cover  the good works  of some,  that 
others  might  not see their attainments.  He nosed  around  for 
secrets  that would  entrhp  his companions,  and blew them up i 
into monumental  crimes  in the eyes  of the world.  He who  turns  
the world upside  down, places  the deceitful  on the throne,  
casts  the truthful down because such is a being  of base earth,  
he will never  stand  as equal  of the uplifted.  i
'While  this man was on earth, the language  of the ■ 
Creator  was not clear  to the children of men,  for God bestowed  
upon  this man money,  he gave him children,  and he showered  
on him treasures  of the world.  These  bequests  did not however  
remain  long in his grasp,,  and this it was that make  his downfall  
so resounding.  When be had reached  the pinnacle  of his 
attainments,  Edumore  took  him down,  he fell, became  a man of 
the past, distress descended  upon him, his heart was 
crestfallen,  his name became  so tainted  that no one would






THE  SECOND DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,WHO  LIVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
name  his child the same  as his.
'One  day, my Creator  ordered me to remove  him hence,  
so that the world  might  know  that there  is no false dealing  at 
the hands  of Edumare.  Every  man must  harvest  the fruits  of his 
labour,  either  on earth,  or in heaven.  Observe,  you have seen 
the torments  to which  the man is subjected  in my home.  Do not 
imagine  that it is cruelties  that we are engaged  upon in this 
place but, when the man was on earth, when he was in a 
position  of authority,  he ordered  the beheading  of a number  of 
people,  ordered  that several  be slashed,  that numberless  be 
subjected  to diverse  cruelties  for no just  cause.  Remember  that 
Olodumare  dearly  loves  the human  race  to such an extent  that 
he provided  ali kindsof  things  for the world,  so that  earth  is rich 
in a variety,  all gifts from God. This man that you behold  
tormented  the people  who are beloved  of God to an extent  
that the tongue  can hardly  recountl  Whatever  each person  
sows  wi 11 eventuaIly  germinate  for him to harvest.
'1 do not wish to speak  much  for now, son of humans,  I 
greet  you, I bid you welcome,  and 1 greet  my good  friend  for his 
task  of playing  host,  my most  worthy  friend,  the Furry-Bearded  
One,  he who  resides  on the promontory  of rocks.'
Thus did this Mighty  Spirit  speak  to us, Iku, the being  
who  defers  to no one,  who  would  never  say, this is an important  
person,  I shall not touch him,  the Spirit  being  whose  home  is in 
the halfway  outpost  between  earth  and heaven.
Before  he had even concluded,  my mind had calmed






^ 4
IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
somewhat  and I had resolved  to speak  courteously  to him to 
ensure  my safe passage  home.  My response  went  thus: 'You 
Spirit  of Great  Consequence,  accept  my thanks.  You have been  
given  authority  over ail things  on earth,  over all living things.  
You have been  given  authority  over  kings  and princes,  over  the 
rich and the poor,  over  the doctor  and the herbalist.  You have 
power  over the beasts  of the forests  and the belly-crawling  
serpents,  over  lion and wild boar,  the fox and the elephant,  the 
python  and all other  snakes.  You have power  over  the birds  of 
the air and the fishes  of the ocean,  over  the plants  of the forest  
and the tiny insects.  The warriors  who have passed  on, you 
took them away,  the men of authority  whose  word was law, 
you took  them  from  the world,  the titled  in council  you brushed  
their eyes into thin air, my heart  rejoices  this day that I have 
encountered  a being as mighty  as you. I thank  you for the 
words  you have  spoken,  and I shall  deliver  your  message  to the 
children  of earth, I shall not interchange  one for two. 
Therefore,  I ask that you excuse  me today,  I shall return to see 
you tomorrow.  I was actually  occupied  with an undertaking  
when  I felt I should  make  time  to at least  get a glimpse  of you, 
therefore,  goodbye  for a short  while,  I shall  return  home  where  
I am lodged  with my friend,  he of the Furry  Beard,  who dwells  
on the promontory  of rocks.'
My own response  over,  Iku and I greeted  each  other.  We 
did not shake  hands,  neither  did one prostrate  to the other.  
Instead  we nodded  to each other,  then bade  each other  good ­
bye, praying  that God would  grant  us a meeting  in good  health






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,  WHO  LIVED  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
the following  day.
This  was how  my friend  and 1 took  our leave  of the home  
of this vile Spirit and pursued  our way home.  When  we had 
walked  a little while, 1 asked the bearded  one why,-he  had 
flashed  me an eye signal not to shake  hands  with Iku, not to 
prostrate  in greeting,  and to exercise  care by his bed. He 
explained,  'Whoever  shakes  Iku by the hand thereby  ends his 
portion,  whosoever  prostrates  himself  to him, his portion  is 
lost, and whoever  sits down on his bed finds his portion
transferred  to the other  world.'
What  the Bearded  One said left a deep  impression,  and 
my fear increased  even more, ali the viciousness  1 had 
encountered  in that house  began  to trickle-into  the stream  of 
my mind. 1 who had a wife with whom I had not enjoyed  
companionship  for any time  to speak  of, certainly  did not wish
I my portion  ended  in this world  as yet. Equally  affective  was  the
fact that 1 had just learnt  that  she had given  birth,  and 1 had yet 
‘ to set my eyes  on my own child.  1 was not over anxious  that my 
portion  should  be lost, 1 who had endured  so much in the 
world,  who had yet to savour  much  of the world,  was not yet 
prepared  to sample  the other  world.  1 said to my friend:
'My dear  friend,  if you ever see my feet in the home  of 
this neighbour  of yours,  feel free to declare  that 1 am not the 
son of my father.'
The Bearded  one replied, 'No matter what, my 
understanding  is that  you cannot  fail to touch  there  tomorrow,  
j you did promise  that  you would  return and it is only  fitting  that






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
you keep  your  promise/
I hardly  allowed  him to finish  before  I retorted,  'I have  no 
intention  of fulfillingthat  promise/
At this, the bearded  one laughed  and replied,  'My 
friend,  wasn't  it you who made  the promise  before  that man,  
with  your  mouth  resounding  like a woodpecker's  beak?'
I retorted, 'So if my mouth  sounded  like a woodpecker's  
beak,  is it with a soft countenance  that  one separates  the child  
from the nut? You saw that man's  eyes glowing  like a furnace,  
you saw his nails like a lion's  claws,  and you still ask if I should  
have used a diplomat's  language?  Don't  you realize  that, like it 
or not, I had to speak  soothingly  in his presence?'
Furry Beard replied,  'Howu,  this is hot proper.  One 
should  not promise  and fail to keep  the promise.  We ought  to 
visit  the man's  home  tomorrow.'
At this I let out a scream,  'Visit  whose  home?  Mr. Fufry-  
Bearded-One, I repeat,  visit  whose  home?'
He replied,  'Whose  other  home  could  it be? Isn't it the 
home  of Death?'
I was angered  at this and cried,  'It is your head that will 
visit  the hohie  of Death.  It is your  wife  that  will visit Iku's home,  
you with  your  sweep-all  furry  beard !'
Furry-Beard  calmly  replied,  'Be my beard  furry,  or be it 
furrier-furry,  we shall visit the man's  home  tomorrow.  If.I have 
to dragyou  there,  I shall.  If carry  you is what  it takes,  I shall  cariy






THE  SECOND  DAY  WITH  FURRY-BEARDED-ONE,WHO  LIVED ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
you there/
My anger mounted  at this and I tol?l him. Baba  
Onirungbon,  this is going  too far. Imagine,  just  take  a look  lately
at your  trailing  broom  of a beard !'
Rather  than take offence  however,  he only retorted,  'I 
thought  I saw you standing  with  self-assured  hands  on cocky  
hips as you perorated.  Well, I shall reveal  something  to you. I 
have been contemplating  a huge feast to celebrate  your  
presence  here, invite  the special  people  of Igbo Olodumare,  
and have even toyed with the notion of making  Iku the 
chairman  of the occasion,  with Disease  as his right-hand  
person,  then  to place  you as the Guest  of Honour  among  them.
This generated  a horrendous  fear in me, I was now 
pushed  to the wall. I had taken my sacrifice  beyond  the 
mosque,  slaughtered  a pig for breakfast.  1 roasted  an unripe  
plantain  for the white  man to eat, tried  to persuade  the Hausa  
to abstain  from kola nut, exhorted  the Yoruba  to forsake  the 
cornmeal  wrap.  This turn of events  enraged  me so much  that 1 
did not speak  to the Furry-Bearded-One  until we arrived  back  
at home.
By the time we reached  home,  I had resolved  to plead  
with him, and 1 pleaded  earnestly  over the matter.  I told him 
that I was unable  to return  to the dwelling  of Death,  that he 
should  kindly  look  for some  means  to avoid  such a visit. Furry-






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
I Bearded  one then gave me his response,  one that was filled
with deep  wisdom.
'Olowo-aiye/  he began, 'there is something  I must  
impart  to you today,  and I want  you to take  good  heed  and learn  
sagacity  from it. If you encounter  someone  who makes a 
pledge  and fails to fulfill it, that person  is unreliable.  When  a 
man of moral  worth  gives  his word,  it is fitting  that we relate  to 
his word  exactly  so. The pledge  of a man of moral  worth  is like a 
chain with which  he has bound  himself  - until he fulfills  that 
j pledge,  the chain  will not unfasten.  A worthless  man considers
a pledge  as a trivial  matter,  when he says one thing  today,  he 
says another  the following  day, until the entire  world  comes  to 
regard  his promise  as one made  by a slight  person, so that it 
does not matter  what he says, the world regards  it as the 
I utterance  of an unserious  mind.  Olowo-aiye,  you are a man of
(' moral  worth  - no matter  how grave  your reservations,  I want
you to deliver  on your  promise.
'What  I can do is this: because  of you, I shall not invite  
Iku to come  feasting  with me, and when we arrive  at the home  
of this Spirit tomorrow,  we shall not enter. We shall do this 
instead  - we shall  stay  on the threshold,  saying  that  we were  on 
our way somewhere  else but paused  to say hello  as promised  
during  our last visit.'
After  he had spoken,  I reflected  deeply  on this matter,  
for I recognized  that  the venture  had indeed  reached  execution  
point  - there  was no choice  but to prepare  myself  against  the
I






THE THIRD  DAY WITH  
BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  
ON THE ROCK  PROMONTORY
I could  not sleep  till dawn  the following  day, only once  did 
my eyes  close.  1 had terrible  dreams,  I saw a vicious  spirit  in 
my dreams  who began  to pursue  me all over  the place. As I 
fled from pillar  to post trying  to escape  him, I ran into a snake  
whose  fangs were  like a lion's,  and when  I again  fled from  this, 
ran into a beast  that was not particularly  big but resembled  
more  a man with elongated  talons  - it glared  at me. This  woke  
me up.  When  I woke,  I was panting  heavily  as if I was on a sprint  
field,  my heart  pounding  like the engine  of an airplane.
Still, I joined  the Furry-Bearded-One  for breakfast  the 
following  morning,  and when  that was done,  I proposed  that 
we proceed  to Iku's home  and embark  on whatever needed  to 
be done,  and he agreed.  When  we arrived  there,  we did not 
meet  that Spirit himself  at home,  so we left a message  for him 
whenever  he returned,  saying that we had called.  With  that, I 
returned  most joyfully  to the home of my friend,  the Furry-  
Bearded-One  who  lives  on the rock  promontory.
My friend  treated  me to a most  sumptuous  hospitality,  
he did not even let me dig into the bean-cake  that my mother  
had brought  me from  the heavenly  abode.  When  we returned  
from Iku's home,  we ate a second  time.  Furry  Beard  then  took






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
me on a climb  onto  his roof  terrace,  and when  we had taken  our 
seats and faced each other, he said to me that the most  
important  engagement  for the day was no more than the 
words  he wanted  to address  to me. This brought  me great  
happiness,  I adjusted  my seat, made  myself  comfortable  and 
let my friend  know  that  I was all ears,  and he could  proceed.
'Without  a doubt,' he began, 'it has not failed to 
astonish  you how you came  to meet  me in this forest  the day 
before  yesterday.  You cannot  understand  the nature  of my 
being  and the kind of position  I occupy  here unless  I tell you. 
This I, that you see before  you> am partly  human  and partly  
ghommid.  And how did this come about?  My father was 
human,  he was also a hunter.  At the time  of which  I speak  - it is 
quite  a while,  the time  of my birth  - he was  the most  fearless  of 
all the hunters  in the world.  My mother  was not human  at all, 
she was a ghommid.  But she was beautiful!  According  to the 
habit  of many  women  of beauty,  she held herself  proud,  and 
many  high-placed  suitors  who wished  to marry  her when  she 
was single  failed  to gain her favour  until at last all these  nobility  
left her alone,  and findinga  husband  became  difficult  for her.
'In the end, my father  met her in the forest  and married  
her, and according  to how  the story  went,  my father  had indeed  
heard  of the fame  of this ghommid  and had set out in search  of 
her. In those  days, women  were much  wiser  than at present,  
they did not choose  a husband  solely on account  of his 
bravado,  they did not marry  them only on account  of their






m THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
good looks, but they were attracted  to men of spirit, they  
looked  for a love that was deep  and would  not fade,  sought  to 
ascertain  if he knew  what  was appropriate  as appropriate and 
what befitting  as befitting.  For if a man knows what is 
appropriate  and what  is befitting,  we will not encounter  such  a 
person  in the home  of impropriety.  With  these  considerations  
in mind, my mother  led my father  into a rock in her family  
compound  and tested  him. Within  this rock, my father  battled  
a lion and slew him with an axe. He fought  a leopard  and 
cudgeled  him to death,  he engaged  a python  and killed  it with  a 
whip,  a nd for seven  days,  my father  went  without  food.
'When  my father  had emerged  from these  trials, she 
asked  him, "What  are the reasons  that make  you love me?"  My 
father  gave her the response  of the wise: "I do love you but 
even I do not understand  this love, and the more  I see of you, 
the deeper  grows  my love for you." My mother  then said, "I 
shall marry  you, man of great wisdom,  for the love which is 
truly replete  is that which  no human  being  can fathom.  If one 
loved  simply  because  the face is attractive, loved  on account  of 
position,  loved  on account  of a reputable  home,  loved  because 
of the sharpness  of the brain,  loved  because  of elegance,  loved  
because  of the smoothness  of talk, loved  because  of the strides  
of the legs, then  that love amounts  to nothing.  For the day will 
come  when  these  attributes  may fade away,  or have become  
boring,  but if the love is of a kind that you cannot  simply  
itemize,  then such love lacks for nothing.  Therefore,  1 shall 
marry  you, and you shall  be my lord and master."






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'My good  friend,  even sd did my father  wed my mother.  
At the time  of my birth,  since my mother  was herself  a gnomid,  
she sneaked  into the outskirts  of heaven  and plucked  one of 
the fruits  of eternal  life and gave it to me, I ate it, and thus it is 
that I cannot  ever die. When  this deed came to the ears of 
Edumare  however,  he instructed  his angels  to bring  me to the 
borders  of heaven  once I have lived seventy  years among  
humans.  This is how I came  to be here,  where  you found  me, 
where  I can hear the cockcrow  of heaven,  this I, the Furry-  
Bearded-One  who  dwells  on the rock  promontory.
'However,  my good  friend,  while  I lived among  humans,
I witnessed  many  of their secrets.  Let me tell you a little of 
these  nasty  habits  in which  they  indulge,  let me tell you a little 
oftheirdiscontent.
'I am the one who asserts  this to you, even if the world  
becomes  transformed  to the extent that sheep carry the 
pregnancy  of goats and cats the pregnancy  of cockerels,  the 
heart  of the envious ’can never  taste  joy. The envious  does not 
desire  the progress  of any except  himself;  the envious  cannot  
bear that any becomes  learned  except  himself;  the envious  
cannot  bear  that  any attain  a high  office  except  himself;  no one 
rnay own his own home  except  himself;  the children  of others  
should  not achieve  importance  in life, only his own - yet the 
world  is full of people,  and among  them  we cannot  fail to see 
those  who attain  success  in their ways, but as they advance,  
the heart  of the envious  is grieved,  for the envious  can never






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
find contentment,  not if the earth itself is transformed  and 
becomes  heaven.
'Listen,  and 1 shall  tell you a tale.
'One day, while I was among  humans,  a man lived  
nearby  our home.  The man  was extremely  improverished,  and 
had one wife.  This wife loved  her husband  exceedingly,  and all 
through  the period  of their  hardship,  did not once  abandon  her
husband,  not even  for one day.
'Then,  after  a while,  a rich man decided  to come  to the 
aid of his poor neighbour.  The former  owned  a piece  of land 
filled with palm trees. He came  to an arrangement  with the 
poor man that he should  tap wine  from the palms,  sell it and 
share  the proceeds  with him equally.  He advanced  the would-  
be tapper  money  for the purchase  of gourds  and all other  
appliances  for the task. Our neighbour  was overjoyed,  he 
prepared  one day and went  to the farm, secured  the gourds  to 
the palm  trees,  confident  that,  by the following  day, the gourds  
would be filled with wine, he would sell it, then share the 
proceeds  as agreed.  The following  morning,  when  he reached  
the palm trees,  he found  his gourds  on the ground,  smashed.  
He was astonished  and deeply  distressed.
'On returning  home, he contrived  to procure  some  
funds  somehow  and bought  fresh  gourds,  positioned  them  on 
the palm  tree tops as before.  He resolved  however  to find out 
what  was responsible  for the destruction of his gourds  and so, 
on completion  of his work,  he did not return  home  but climbed






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
a tree,  waiting  to see what  would  happen.  He stayed  there until  
nightfall  but nothing  happened,  but he remained  in place.
'It was not till the middle  of the night that he spied a 
figure coming  towards  the palm trees, so he watched  very 
carefully.  He saw  that  this figure,  from  the legs downwards,  was 
that of a man, so were its arms. The rest however  was 
indisputablyan  antelope's.
'When  the curious  figure arrived  at the base of the 
palms,  it began  to climb  them  one after  the other.  On arriving  at 
the top he emptied  the wine  into a large  gourd  he had with him, 
then threw down the tapper's  own gourd where it was 
smashed.  One by one, each gourd  that had been tied to the 
crown of the palm was destroyed.  When this being had 
completed  his work  of destruction,  our neighbour  let out a loud 
cry, upon  which  the intruder  snatched  up his gourd  and fled, 
while  the former  went in pursuit.  The moon  shone  bright  like 
noontime.  They ran until daybreak,  still our palm wine  tapper  
did not relent  until  they  gained the top of a hill when  suddenly,  
the man found  himself  in the midst  of a medley  of animals  from  
every  corner  of the world,  gathered  in council.
'When  he erupted into  their  midst,  the thieving  creature  
fell down among  the beasts  while the man came to a half 
among  them,'trembling  with fear. The lion, king of beasts, 
boiled  with rage, for it was a desecration  that man,  who is the 
sworn enemy  of animals,  should come in their midst. He 
ordered  that the man be killed.  However,  quick  on the heels of






m THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
the order,  the man pleaded  with  the animals  for a chance  to tell
his side of the story,  and they  agreed.
'He plunged  into the story of his life, how he was a 
pauper,  how a rich man took pity on him and they came  to an 
agreement  over  wine  tapping  and sharing  of the proceeds,  how 
he found his gourds  smashed  several  times  until he resolved  to 
find out the root of the havoc,  and how he discovered  the 
culprit and pursued  it until he found himself  among  the 
animals.
'When  the man had said his piece,  the words  angered  
the animals  against  their member  who had kept smashing  the 
tapper's  gourds.  Would  you believe  it? — this antelope  was in 
fact sent by the gathering  to supply  them  palm  wine  during  the 
‘period  of their assembly?  That  they supplied  him funds,  that 
before  venturing  out he was to turn himself  into a human  and 
buy the palm wine in the market?  Instead  - it now became  
tlear  - what he did was to pocket  the money,  steal the palm  
wine  of others  all over  the farms,  then  claim  that he had bought  
it. Instantly,  the itinerant  palm  wine  stealer  of an antelope  was 
executed.  The animals  also expressed  great  sympathy  for the 
. man.  They  consulted  over  what  they  might  do to ease  his plight  
and, in the end, conferred  on him a talent  of understanding  the 
language  of birds and beasts  in conversation.  They  imposed  a 
'condition on him however:  he should  never  revea|to his fellow  
‘humans  that he possessed  this talent  - if he ever broke  that 
\






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
rule, he would  die that  very  day.
'The man returned  home with this rare gift. He 
continued  with his rest of his life without  betraying  his secret  to 
anyone.
'One  day, as he sat in his compound  taking  his ease  early  
evening,  he heard  a hen telling  her chickens  not to remain  too 
long  on a certain  spot,  because  if they  did and persisted  in their  
soil scratching,  they might  expose  a bag of gold beneath,  and 
the house owner  would spot it. Thus did the hen speak  
admonish  her  chicks, little  knowing  that  he was  speaking  to the 
house  owner  in person.  The chickens  immediately  obeyed  their  
mother-hen, ’they left the spot and followed  her in search  of 
their  daily  feed.
'No sooner  had the chickens  left than  the man picked  up 
hoe and axe and began  to dig. Before  long he had unearthed  
the bag of gold of which  the chicken  had spoken, and  hauled  it 
off. From then on, a bountiful  reversal  of fortunes  descended  
on him, he became  a man of wealth  and fame,  and his repute  
was spread  throughout  the neigbouring  towns.
'As is the nature  of many  among  the rich, wealth  covers  
the faces  of some  like the foam  of the ocean,  intoxicates  others  
like palm wine, affluence  causes others to forget their  
beginnings.  Instead  of using their new wealth  to exalt their  
Creator,  they begin to defy the one who had made them.  
Edumare  is powerful,  he does not fail to observe  those  who,
albeit  titled  and wealthy,  yet conduct  themselves  with  humility.






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHOLIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
and tender  their  meekness  before  the King  of Heaven.
'When  the man had become  wealthy,  he decided  to 
marry  wife upon  wife,  but his first  choice  was no beauty.  Indeed  
her two legs were impaired  - she was lame.  He had chosen  her 
because  she was a princess,  even though  the feminine  envy  
within  this woman  easily overwhelmed  all the accumulated  
envy of the rest of the world.  The woman  wore envy like a 
dress,  she made  a waist-band  out of jealousy,  her wrapper  was 
unstinted  greed and her shoulder  shawl, decked  over her 
smock,  was avarice.
'From the moment  of her entry into the home,  she 
made her destination  plain: the senior wife was to share  
nothing  further  with  their  husband.  He was not to speak  to her, 
play with her, he was to do nothing  further  for her. Yet this 
newcomer  was not with the husband  when the senior  wife 
could  barely  boast  of a piece  of cloth  to her back.
'One  evening,  the husband  and the senior  wife  were  in a 
room,  while  the new bride  was outside.  From  there,  the man 
heard  two mice  speaking  to each  other.  They  were  insulting  the 
man for failing  to go to bed early  so they could  forage  at large  
and feed  themselves.  Hearing  this, the man  burst  into laughter.  
Hardly  had he closed  his mouth  when  the junior  wife flew into 
the room  like a bantam  cock  with  a piercing  shout,  screamingfit  
to kill, accusing  the man of making  fun of her. The man 
reassured  her that this was not the case but she refused  to 
relent,  insisting  that  he must  reveal  what  had been  the cause  of






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
his laughter.  The argument  went  on till early  morning.
'The day had hardly  dawned  when  the woman  went  to 
her father  and laid her complaint  before  him. In addition,  she 
lied that she had heard mention  of her name while her 
husband  and senior  wife  were  speaking,  and that  it was beyond  
a doubt  that she was the butt of their ridicule.  With this, she 
demanded  of her father  that he send  for her husband,  stressing  
that if he failed to reveal  the cause  of his merriment,  it meant  
that he was in contempt  of the throne.  For such a crime,  his 
execution  was mandatory.
'Eiye-ko-so-ka  of a king sent for the man. When he 
arrived,  he inforrhed  the king  that he could  not reveal  the cause  
of his laughter.  The king was enraged  and told him that he 
would  surely  execute  him, but the man declared  himself  in 
accord  with the sentence.  He was ordered  to return  home  and 
settle his affairs,  while a day was set for his death.  He went  
home,  gathered  his possessions  and bequeathed  them  to the 
first wife, senior  to the death-dealing  princess  of a wife, and 
prepared  himself  fordeath.
'When  the execution  day  arrived,  the arena  was  full, not 
one dweller  in that city was missing.  As was the custom  of that 
place, the condemned  man is given time to address  the 
gathered  public  before  his death.
'When  he plunged  into his story,  a great  fear descended  
on his listeners.  He spoke  of how he was once a pauper,  how 
the poverty bit so hard that he owned  nothing but a loincloth.






THE  THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
and his wife only  a waist  slip, a time  when  the entire  money  in 
his possession  never  amounted  to threepence,  when  he could  
not sleep for contemplation  of his plight,  his mind never  at 
ease,  when  his food was pitiable  and his body  emaciated  as a 
broomstick.
'He spoke  of how his neighbour  took  pity on him and he 
began  to tap the palm wine, how an antelope  smashed  his 
gourds  until he ran him to ground  among  an assemblage  of 
beasts,  how, in consequence  of this, the beast bestowed  on 
him the gift of understanding  the conversation  of birds and 
beasts,  but cautioned  that the day he revealed  this secret,  he 
would  die. Finally  he spoke  of the conversion  between  the mice  
which  made  him burst out with laughter,  and how his junior  
wife  had persisted  in accusing  him of mocking  her.
'The moment  he concluded  his speech,  he fell down,
and died.
'My good friend,  the moment  the man drew his last 
breath,  they  seized  the woman,  and hanged  her  from  a tree.
'This  is the nature  of the world,  dear  friend.  Some  utilize  
their  wealth  in espousing  death,  rejoicing  that  they  have  taken  
a wife, others  wed debts,  and think  they are taking  a wife,  yet 
others  on account  of greed  throw  away  a good  wife. Marriage  
is not a light undertaking,  anything  that  concerns  one's  home  is 
no trivia.  If one desires  a wife, such a man must  think  deeply  
and pray God to be his guide,  for a mother  is different  from a 
wife,  a father  differs  from  one's  wife.  A woman is the shell  of a






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
snail, the snail the man, wherever  the snail goes, the shell  
follows.  Multiple  wives mean multiple  troubles,  the more  
wives accumulate,  the more love diminishes,  and there are 
hundreds  of men who live with their implacable  enemies  who  
they continue  to call women.  Cut your coat according  to your  
size, my good  friend,  ensure  that your  intended truly  loves  you 
before  you bring her into the home.  True, it is you who must  
take the first step and ask for her hand before  she gives her 
consent,  nonetheless,  do ensure  that  she does  love  you in turn.  
And you must  never  behave  like a dissembler  of a man,  the like 
of which  women  pray  to God never  to walktheirway.
'Similarly,  the envious  abound  in this world  of ours,  and 
there is no route  closed  to them in the exercise  of their envy.  
The envious  is one whose  insides  churn at the progress  of 
another.  If one is in the position  of authority,  the envious  seek 
all ways to show to the man that he is undeserving  of the 
position, forgetting  that whoever  God decides  to promote,  will 
never  belong  among  the downgraded.'
Thus spoke  the Furry-Bearded-One,  and when he had 
finished,  I said to him, 'My good friend,  is this where  your  
discourse  ends?  Please,  continue,  your  words are delightful  to 
me, your words  pepetrate  my ears, I am enjoying  your words  
my friend,  you of the Furry  Beard.'
Furry-Bearded-One  rose from where he was sitting,  
pointed  to a tree  that  was in flower,  beautiful,  and said, 'Look  at 
that tree oyer there,  that one whose  leaves  are dark green.






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY^
then see also how stunning  its flowers  also are. Next, look to 
the right of the tree, you will see another  tree, somewhat  
smaller,  observe  how the two trees resemble  each other.  
Inspect  them carefully,  because  I wish to. speak  about  those  
trees.'
When  he said this, I assured  him, 'Yes, 1 can see them,  
and indeed  they closely  resemble  each other,  they look like 
twins  among  all other  trees  in that  area. So, continue  with  your  
tale.'
With this encouragement,  my host resumed  his 
discourse.
'Olowo-aiye,  those  two trees before  your eyes - they  
were  once human.  The bigger  of the two was male,  the other  
female.  The  two loved  each other  to the very peak  of emotion  
and they  planned  to become  man  and wife.  The parents  of both  
were  opposed  to the union  however,  for there  was no love lost 
among  the two parents.  Still both  the young  man  and the maid  
were like tongue  and mouth  to each other,  they  often spoke  to 
each other  through  a hole in the wall between  their houses. 
When  the girl placed  her ear against  the hole in her room,  the 
man would  speak  from  the other  side. When  the youth  placed  
his ear against  the hole in turn, his lover  spoke  into it from her 
side. Love does not walk  without  a little stumble,  but absolute  
love turns  hills into plains,  walks  among  thorns  without  a care, 
and runs  blithely  between  pit and earth  mounds.
'So, these  two lovers  resolved  to flee their homes  for
I






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
another  town where  they would live together  according  to 
their  desire.  But planning  is mortal,  decision  lies with God. He 
knows  tomorrow,  and the day after  tomorrow,  and knows  how 
many  bundles  of years  lie before  us.
'The  two youth  resolved  to quit home  at night,  after  the 
moon  had risen,  and arranged  to meet  on the banks of a river,  
whoever  first  arrived  to wait  for the other.  When  they  had been  
reunited,  they would  elope and thus begin to live together,  
eating  pounded  yam with love, eating  their  eba with love, and 
seasoning  with love their wraps  of corn-meal,  that father  of 
corn  extracts.  >
'On the night  of the appointed  day, the girl was first to 
arrive  at the river bank  where  she waited  for her lover.  While  
she waited  however,  she saw  a lion approach,  and as she fled to 
seek refuge  in a hole, her shawl  dropped  to the ground.  When  
the lion reached  that spot, it sniffed  it, tossed  it about  with its 
snout,  smearing  it haphazardly  from its blood-stained  mouth.  
After  which,  the lion slaked  its thirst  in the river and moved  
away  to seek  its own lair. Since  she did not know  when  the lion 
left, the girl remained  in her hiding  place.
'The youth  arrived  soon after. Instead  of his beloved,  
what  he found  was  the shawl  on the ground,  soaked all over  in 
blood.  Seeing  this, he concluded  that his beloved  was  dead.  He 
burst  into bitter  tears,  and broke  into lamentations.
"Alas,  alas! My beloved  is gone.  What  does  life'meari  for






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
me without  my beloved!  She landed  in the clutches  of a lion 
which  tore her in pieces. Who  else is there  on this earth  like my  
love? Who on this earth can match her beauty?  Who has 
looked  out for me as she has done?  Ah, my love, my beloved,  
my most  cherished  beloved,  on the days of tears  you brought  
me joy. On the day of tears  you brought  me laughter;  on the 
days of anger  you pacified  me, on the days of altercation  you 
gave me patience,  on days of dejection  you lifted my spirits,  
when  the children of earth  rejected  me you clung  to me, when  
they hurled  abuses  at me, you did not join them,  when  they  
conspired  against  me, you stood  by me, it was  you who brought  
me respect  among  friends,  it was you whom I boasted  of 
among  the socialites,  it was  you that I flaunted  in the face  of the 
well-to-do.  Even as you cared  for my countenance  so did you 
protect  my back. Wherever  you met my people,  you praised  
them highly,  , whenever  I had guests  you entertained  them  
with gladness,  and it was only when I was able that I even 
bothered to repay  you, only when  I was in funds did I ever buy 
you gifts, yet you did not complain  to your siblings  to make 
them  accuse  me of neglect,  wherever  1 left you there  I found  
you, you did not accept  me, then go around  whispering  to 
others  in secret  places,  not once  did 1 find you in the walk  of the 
devious  since  we embarked  on the  journey  of our affection.  You 
lauded  me as was fitting,  you played with me when  it was time  
for play, you grieved  with me in time of grief,  and not once  did 
you ever  say to me, what  can you dare?  What  then is left for me






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
after  this?  That  you should  depart,  and I remain  behind?  Not 
me! The tortoise  does not leave its shell behind  - where  the 
tortoise  go, there  the shell must  follow."
'Thus  did the youth  lament,  and when he stopped,  he 
took  out his sword  and inflicted  on himself  a wound  so grievous  
that  his intestines  spilled  out: death  took  hold of him.
'Hardly  had the youth  ended,  when  the maid emerged  
from  the hole in which  she had  hidden.  To describe  the anguish  
that enveloped  her when  she saw the corpse  of her friend  is 
beyond  the calling  of any human.  Instantly  she sank  into a deep  
depression,  fell to the ground  and soon passed  away.
'The story of these  two deaths  riveted  the world and 
Edumare  turned  the twain  into those  very trees  that you now 
look upon,  whose  leaves  remain  cool as plantain  leaves  on the 
banks of a stream,  and whose  flowers  perfume  the air we 
breathe.  Edumare  also assigned  two dwellers  of heaven  to look 
after  both  trees,  ensuring  that  they  come  to no harm  from  any 
direction.
'Take note, my friend, when love is at its most  
consuming,  it is like the ocean  whose  spume  covers  the sands 
of the beach  - even  thus  does  it cover  the eyes  of lovers.  Love  is 
like palm wine which  the man drinks,  it begins  to make him 
drunk  and can turn him into a lunatic  so that he no longer  
knows  what  he is doing.  Many  women turn a deaf  ear to their  
relations  when love has boiled  over, like hot water  over yam 
flower.  All youth,  boys and girls, should  leave  their eyes wide






THE THIRD  DAY WITH  BARA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  UVE5  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
open and continue  to pray to God to guide  them in the right  
path  before  they  begin  to fall in love. The  face  and the dress  are 
what  many  look  for before  they  embark  on a love affair,  this is 
the very height  of stupidity. Anyone  who  fails to reflect  deeply  
and permits  love to mount  him like a horse,  when love then  
rides  them  into a ditch,  he will vanish  utterly  into that pit and 
leave  no trace.'
Thus  did the Furry-Bearded-One  impart  to me yet again  
an important  piece  of wisdom  as he finished  his second  tale. 
Observing  that he had fallen silent, I spoke.  'My dear Furry
Beard,  Ithankyou  greatly,  Ithankyou  and Ithankyou  yet again.
The more one acquires  years on his head, the more one 
acquires  wisdom.  Do you ask me why I say this? I have 
remained  astonished  since  you began  to speak  today,  listening  
to these weighty  words  that are lodged  in your mouth  and 
paying  attention  to the importance  of the narratives  in the 
passage  of your  throat.  After some  time reflecting  on them,  I 
find myself  close to shedding  tears over the fate of these  
jchildren,  since the children  of these  days no longer  defer  to 
their  elders.  They  have  become  wise  unto  themselves.  They  are 
extinguished  like fire and contract  avoidable  illnesses,  yet they  
do not think.  Let them  take heed  of the words  of you elders,  let 
them  replenish  wisdom  from  wisdom,  and add understanding  
to understanding,  so that they understand  the nature  of the 
roots that have entangled  the feet of those  who went  before  
them,  lest  they  fall into a ditch. It's all self-deception:  the bush-






forest  of olodumare
fowl which  tries to imitate  the domestic  fowl is playing  with 
death,  the child  who  thinks  he is the equal  of an elder  is pulling  
trouble  by the leg, for the mind of a child is up there  
somewhere,  but the mind of the elder is deeper  than the 
waters  of the ocean.
'Therefore,  Furry-Bearded-One,  I thank  you yet again. 
Continue  with your discourse,  it gladdens  my heart  and I am 
not weary  of it.'
After  I had spoken,  my host studied  me for a long time,  
nodded  his head up and down  and said, 'Young  man, you are 
indeed  full of wisdom,'  and with  this remark,  he continued:
'Olowo-aiye,  there  are times  when  I fall into prolonged  
thinking,  when I direct  my thoughts  at the dissatisfied  among  
the children  of the earth,  it is as if someone  with the power  of 
invocation  has cursed  these  beings.  The children  of men never  
concede  that  the position they  have attained  is sufficient,  they  
continue  to nurse  expectations  until  the day they  die. However,  
when  I consider  this from a different  point  of view, it seems  to 
me that if the world  did not harbour  such people,  it would  not 
be as delightful  as it is. That  admitted,  it would  appear  that it is 
all a question  of balance.  Let us use the case of the religious  as 
example.
'A Christian  who was in the position  of lay reader  in the 
church,  left that position  and became  a priest, was then  
promoted  to the rank  of a bishop  and yet remains  dissatisfied,  I 
ask you, what more  does he want?  Does he aspire  to become






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
God?
'Or take the Moslem.  He becomes  an Alhaji, then  
becomes  a junior  Imam,  ascends  to the position  of the Head  of 
the Mullahs,  still he continues  to stretch  his neck - does he 
aspire to become  Allah? Pity, the children  of the earth  
completely  lack  contentment.
'Observe  also many  of the rich — not all of them but - 
there  are many  who,  when  they  have  become  wealthy,  to feed 
their own mouths  become  a problem.  They begin  to behave  
like people  under  a curse,  the plain gari becomes  their sole 
diet, lunch  or dinner,  till their  cheeks  collapse  and their  bodies  
are dried  up like the meat  that my wife used in her stew  for last 
night's  dinner,  the drumming  of whose  bones  against  my teeth  
still echo  as I speak.
'True,  it is only proper  that man should  strive  to achieve 
great things, that one should never cease to seek self 
advancement,  for whoever  stands  in one spot is like a stagnant  
pool among  the living,  he is like a corpse  among  them.  However, 
whoever  embarks  on that which is permanently  beyond  his 
reach  lacks  only  a tail to become  a monkey  and leap  from  tree  to 
tree.  Take a Yoruba  man who  has no ties to a royal house,  along  
whose  lineage  no one had ever worn  a crown,  none  among  his 
forebears  has ever narrated  a family  history  that relates  to the 
ancestor  Oduduwa,  yet such an individual  leaves  his own town  
for the adjoining,  arrives  there  and begins  to aspire  to the throne  - 
such a man is no different  from a baboon,  except  that his skin






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
happens  to be smoother  than  that  of  the baboon.
'In days gone by, when  the world  had not degenerated  
to its present  state,  when  the children  of men recognized  the 
glory of God far beyond  he present,  Edumare  would  send a 
messenger  from heaven  on a visitation  to the world  at seven-  
year  intervals.  This  servant  was  one of heaven's  own indigenes,  
and the world  knew  him as Asoju-Olodumare.  The season  of 
his visitation  was an eventful  one on earth,  songs  collided  with 
songs,  drums  contested  with drums,  dances  faced  off against  
dance,  all engaged  in festivities  in honour  of their  Creator.  At 
the time I speak  of, Satan  had not yet taken  root  within  earth's  
expanse,  he lived  as an important  personage  in the precincts  of 
heaven.  However,  when  Satan  carried  his sacrifice  beyond  the 
limits  of the crossroads,  became  deaf  to the words  of God, the 
dwellers  of Heaven  chased  hini out. It was then that Satan 
found  a way to ruin the works  of men,  and they  began  to turn 
their  backs  on God.  Satan  was  far more  wicked  than  the rest of 
heaven's  denizens,  and when  he occupied  the hearts  of men,  
they proceeded  to enter sinfulness  as one enters one's  
bedroom,  they cast the hiss of disdain  in the face of their  
Creator,  complained  that the positions  he had assigned  to 
them  were inadequate  and addressed  Him in a manner  most  
unbecoming.
'When  the time  came  for  Asoju-Olodumare  to embark  on 
his visitation,  they did not honour  him as before,  and when  he 
asked  them  why, they  told him that  the status assigned  them  in 
life was not befitting,  that they were discontented  with their






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
places.
'God loved  humanity.  He treated  mortals  as children.  So 
when Asoju returned  to heaven  and reported  that earth  
dwellers  were  in a state  of discontent,  he sent him back  to ask 
of everyone  what  they  truly  desired,  so that  he could  fulfill  their  
wishes.  When  Asoju  returned  to earth,  he sounded  the town-  
crier's  gong all  over  the world  inviting  all peoples  to meet  with 
him, and make their requests,  so that he could report  back to 
his Boss.  For three  solid  years  he was detained on earth,  taking  
down messages  for heaven.  All kinds  of requests  were made,  
far more than one can enumerate,  but i shali mention  just a 
handful  of them.
'One of the men who came before  Asoju made his 
request  thus: "You servant  of the world's  Creator,  servant  of 
Heaven's  Creator,  the unhappiness  of my heart is this: I am 
tired of my impoverished  condition  am I the only one in this 
world,  that my condition  should  be so arduous?  Days without  
food,  days  without  drink,  days without  a covering  for my body  
this is too heavy  a burden.  Do tell the King of Heaven  to take 
pity on me and thrust me into a situation  that is an 
improvement  on this."
'Another  who came before  Asoju narrated  his own 
predicament  in the following  words: "You servant  of the 
world's  Creator,  servant  of heaven's  Creator,  pray the Creator  
on my behalf  that he consider  my matter.  The m.an who is boss 
in my workplace  is more  sadistic  than a poisonous  snake,  his






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
cruelty  sometimes  makes  him seem not quite human  - he is 
hard  as stone.  He sends me on errands  day and night,  sends me  
on secretive  missions,  assigns  me open missions,  never  once  
has even deigned  to utter  a word  of appreciation.  His face is set 
in a grimace  from  morning  till night I request  therefore  that  the 
King of Heaven  place  me under a boss who cares  for my well­
being."
'Yet another  came  to Asoju-Olodurhare,  and his petition  
went  thus:  "Servant  of the world's Creator,  servant  of heaven's  
Creator,  please  inform  the King  of Heaven  that my present  wife 
provides  me not one single  satisfaction.  It was not even she 
who was the first object  of my attention,  at first I had no 
intention  of marrying  her. When the useless  woman  first 
entered  the marital home,  she had no sense  of fashion,  she was 
out of tune with the times,  her clothes  were  ill-fitting,  her gait 
unattractive,  her cooking  hostile  to the passage  of the throat.  
She could  not utter  one word in conversation  - the home  was 
constantly  wrapped  in unearthly  silence.  She was sickly,  every  
day it was a visit  to one healer  after  another.  On top of it all, her 
family from one generation  to the next has remained  
impoverished  - they own nothing.  Now, my friend  who lives 
next door never  owned  a halfpenny,  it waS his father-in-law  
who  turned  him into a man  to be noticed,  who  stood  guarantor  
for him for a loan from the white  man. Recently,  when I saw 
husband  and wife, both had their backs ostentatiously  
implanted  against  the back rest of a motor  car, riding like






THE THIRD  DAY WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
royalty.  Given such unfairness,  you, most prominent  of the 
retinue  of the King of Heaven,  pass my request  to the King of 
Heaven  that he relieve  me of this present  wife, pass her on to 
another,  and find me a wife who would  be more  congenial  to 
my taste  and needs."
'An educated  man also sought  out Asoju-Olodumare,  
the man was a school  teacher  and his request  went thus;  
"Servant  of the world's  Creator,  servant  of the King of Heaven, 
inform  your Creator  that I find my present  employment  most  
unsatisfying.  My salary  is insufficient,  the pupils  give me no 
rest, every day I have to write dissertations  and my brain is 
constantly  heated  up. Those  with whom  I started  this work  
have gained  weight,  their necks are almost  bigger  than |my 
buttocks.  Look at me, thin as a snake,  with no more  girth  than  
an earthworm,  walking  all over  the earth like a praying  mantis.  
Therefore,  I implore  you,  tell the King  of Heaven  that he should  
pleasefindmeanewjob."
'Frorh  yet another  man came  with  the following  request:  
"Servant  of the World's  Creator,  Servant  of Heaven's  Creator,  
inform  the King  of Heaven  that  the child  he has given  me is most  
unsuitable  and I would  like him exchanged  for another,  the 
child is hardboiled,  untamable.  He climbs  trees all over the 
place,  clambers  from  one cliff  to another,  swims  in deep  waters,  
chases  goats  around  the compound,  stones  stray  goats  out in 
the open,  chases  children  all over  the town.  His head  is as dense  
as rock, it does not absorb  one particle  of knowledge,  all Ihe






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
knows is how to make pictures.  The book I bought  him 
recently?  He's lost it. The clothes  I bought  him recently?  Ripped 
to shreds.  He is chairman  at the council  of rice, clan chief of 
gari, king of pounded  yam, he is the buddy  of the food seller, 
enemy  of the industrious - the defects  of this child are beyond  
cataloguing.  Therefore,  you Spirit  from  the precincts  of heaven,  
assist  me to where  1 may find resolution:  I want  a child who is 
malleable,  1 do not want  a disobedient  child."
'Another  educated  one came before  Asoju  OJodumare  
and spoke  with intense  exasperation:  "Servant  of the World's  
Creator,  Servant  of Heaven's  Creator, inform  the King  of Heaven  
to change  the hearts  of the supervisors  of my department  that 
they  stop dislodging  me from  my station  year  after  year,  so that 
1 cease  to wander  from town to town,  from village  to village;  
throwing  me around  in this state  of destabilization  is not at all 
pleasant.  All the valuables  that I had when  I began  this job are 
all damaged,  they were damaged  from constant  moving as I 
loaded  and unloaded  bundles  of my possessions.  Twelve  of my 
wife's  cooking  pots have been smashed,  a hundred  and fifty 
pieces  of cutlery  lost, the children  have no more  sleeping  mats, 
countless  are the small items  we have lost - no one knows  in 
what  direction  they  went  - and just as we are settling down  to 
enjoying  the company  of new-found  friends,  that is when  we 
are again  forcibly  separated.  Therefore  I implore  you, pray  the 
King of Heaven  to find me new superiors,  that they should  
consider  my wife, cast eyes of pity on my children,  think of






m  THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
acquaintances  and stop  tossing  me around."
'One individual  made a request  that made a unique  
impression  on the gathered  people.  He petitioned;  "Servant  of 
earth's  Creator,  servant  of heaven's  Creator,  my request  is 
difficult,  nevertheless,  I pray you to grant it. Tell the King of 
Heaven  that  the town into which  he permitted  me to be born  
does  not satisfy  me. I want  the children  of earth  to know  me as 
an indigene  of a different  town,  I no longer  wish  to be known  as 
being  connected  in any  way with my town.  Since  the day of my 
birth,  I have  known  no pleasure.  Seven  children  I have  had, two 
among  them have died, and 1 have no doubt  in my mind that 
they were killed and eaten by witches.  My occupation  is 
farming,  I have gained no benefit  from it as the soil is 
unproductive.  Yams  do not burgeon,  plantains  do not mature,  
the melon  does  not bear  seeds I do not harvest  more  than  two 
basketfuls  of the melon  seed  in any one year.
' "As if these  were not enough  tribulations,  I was able to 
borrow ten  pounds  from a friend  and began  to trade  with it. I 
earned  such profits  that I was able to repay  him before  long,  
advancing  to building  a house,  buying  a motor  car, began  to 
enjoy my existence  a little, but the people  of the town are 
wicked,  they  beamed  their  sights  on me, and no sooner  did one 
motor  car pack up than the other  rammed  into a tree and was 
smashed  to smithereens.  It was only  thanks  to God that no one 
was killed - even so, I dispensed  lots of money  before  I was 
cleared  of guilt. 1 cannot  count  how  many  senior  siblings,  junior.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
relations,  friends  and acquaintances  I have lost year  after  year,  
Howu,  is it I alone  that is resident of the world?  Worst of all is 
the fact  that  the town  itself  is too insignificant, no one knows  it 
anywhere  else, and I feel ashamed  abroad when I am 
questioned  about  my hometown.  Therefore,  from the depths  
of my heart,  do implore  the King of Heaven  to grant  me a new 
birthplace,  and make  it known  that  this one-horse  backwoods  
is no longer  mine,  that  my birthplace  is entirely  different."
'Thus  and thus  were  the petitions  from  far and wide,  the 
people  continued  to make more requests.  Asoju-Olodumare  
had stipulated  that no one should make any request  that 
involved  their  illnesses  unless  they  were  prepared  to substitute  
a different  illness for their present  ailment,  having first 
considered  the comparative  ravages  done  by the diseases.
'And so, some discarded  headaches  and requested  
stomach  cramps  in their  place,  others  chose  leg diseases  over  
back pains,  some  blind  ones  asked for deafness,  the ringworm  
afflicted  asked  for rheumatism,  lepers  asked  for epilepsy  it was 
an unforgettable  day for the children  of the world,  as they  
began  to openly  expose  secrets  that Edumare  had shielded  
from  their  neighbours.
'Following  this, a number  of people commenced  
negotiations  with Asoju-Olodumare  about their looks. The 
women were  in the majority  during  this phase,  and one's  ears 
were  abundantly  regaled.  Some  said  that  their  heads  were  too 
big and would  prefer  them reduced  in size, others  that their






m THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  UVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
ears were  too large,  and could  they  be shrunk?  Yet others  that 
their legs were too thin, and an increase  in girth would be 
welcome.  Some  took  up the matter  of their  hair, that it was not 
sufficiently  thick, while others  asked for a thinning.  Others  
requested  new  eyes,  they  were  dissatisfied  with  what  they  had, 
some complaining  that theirs  more resembled  the eyes of a 
■ dog, others  that  theirs  were  closer  to a cow's,  and so they  went  
on about  their  eyes. Among  the crowd  were  those  who were  
not bothered  by eyes but by mouths - they were too flat, too 
immense,  too circular,  or that the teeth  inside  them  were  too 
brown. The children  of earth carried on in this manner,  
swinging  from  small  heads  to big heads, short  legs to long,  tiny 
hands  to massive,  and all the while  Asoju-Olodumare  listened  
attentively,  paying  close  heed  to their  complaints.
'When the children  of earth had exhausted  their  
register  of complaints,  the being  rose and sent them back to 
I their homes,  assuring  them  that the following  morning,  every  
petitioner  would  see that all the requests  had been granted.  
Before  their=dispersal  however,  he served.them  notice  that he 
would return in fourteen  years to see how they had been  
prospering  under  the new  changes  that  they  had requested.  At 
this point,  the children  of earth  went  their  various  ways  in the 
I world,  while  the Messenger  took  the route  to heaven.
'And true enough,  the following  day, everything  came  
about  exactly  as he had promised,  all found  themselves  in the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
new  conditions  of their  requests.
'What  proved  the most  surprising  of this however was 
that before that week ended, the children  of earth had 
resumed  their  complaints.  They  wanted  to return  to what  they  
were before. At the end of three years, wailings  and 
lamentations  were in full echo  around  the world.  By the end of 
six years,  the people  began  to perform  rituals  and sacrifices  to 
the King of Heaven to send back  Asoju-Olodumare  earlier  than  
the stipulated  time. They attempted  to sway God from his 
schedule  but of course  this proved  impossible.  They  sacrificed  
goats,  sheep,  they slaughtered  cows at the crossroads,  they  
killed cockerels,  breeding  hens,  they even indulged  in human  
sacrifice  but none  of this made  the slightest  dent in Edumare's  
resolve.  There  would  be no visitation  until the fourteen  years 
had passed.
'When Asoju-Olodumare  arrived,  and all the earth  
dwellers  were*  assembled,  not one of them had remained  
satisfied  with their new status, innumerable  among  them  
indeed wished  to return to their former  condition.  Their  
pronouncements  were no less than frightening,  and I shall  
share  some  of these  with  you.
'He who had requested  a different  child,  on the grounds  
that his own lacked learning  ability, had seen his brilliant  
replacement  enter prison  before  Asoju's  return,  for the new 
offspring,  lacking  good character,  was worse  than the former






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  UVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
who was devoid  of book learning  but also devoid  of criminal  
traits. The educated  ones who cast aside decency  are the 
poisonous  serpents  of the world  who bite innocents  world ­
wide.  They  have  lost their  sight  but do not know  it, they  are in a 
position  of the blind attempting  to show  the way to the clear ­
sighted.  This man who wailed  that his child was deficient  in 
learning  at the earlier  coming  of Asoju  found that the child he 
earlier  rejected  had become  a person  of note. He was a mere  
hair-dresser  in former  times, buthe  was diligent  and took  good  
care of his earnings.  When he began  to trade, his business  
prospered  so well that when  Asoju.  returned,  four hundred  
book  educated  workers  were  working  under  him, and he was 
able to pay their  salaries.  He was  the boss  of them  all, they put 
their hands respectfully  behind their backs when they  
addressed  him, they broke into a run when he summoned  
them  and gave  due deference  when  he was  with  them.
'The man who wanted  to be rich had indeed  become  
wealthy  by the return  of Asoju-Olodumare,  but that being  of 
heaven  found him in the grip of illness.  Once he became  
prosperous,  he no longer  recognized  the dues  to his elders.  His 
comportment  was rude to all and sundry  — to cut the story  
short,  he was struck  down  by illness,  and there  was no doctor  
within  call. The elders  who knew  the treatment  for his ailment  
did not raise a finger,  since he had long spurned  them all. 
Secondly,  even before  his illness,  robbers  had made three  
attempts  on his life, but failed.  At the third attempt  he was






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
severely  wounded  but the hands  of the assailants  did not quite  
snuff  him out. Nonetheless,  they  cut off his right  thumb  and, in 
his bid to escape,  fell into a pit so that the bones  of his right leg 
were shattered  in minuscule  fragments.  On top of these,  his 
riches merely  attracted  trials. Having  acquired  wealth,  he 
married  countless  wives. He was indifferent  to their habits  
when he courted  them,  all that counted  were beauty  and a 
prestigious  family.  By Asoju's  return,  the man no longer  knew  
peace  in the home,  it was full of noise,  wrangling,  sorrow,  his 
domestic  companions  did not encourage  amity,  they  preferred  
to be implacable  enemies  of one another.
'Another  of those  who brought  their  regrets  to Asoju  at 
his second  coming  was the man who complained  that his boss 
was too harsh.  He had duly landed  in the office  of a different  
master  who was cooler  than water  in a water-pot.  However,  
others began to cheat this man, insults that he never  
underwent  in his former  workplace  became  routine  when he 
transferred  to this new boss, and he never took one step 
forward  in progress.
The one who protested  that his wife was a daughter  of 
paupers  had married  the daughter  of a rich man. When  this 
petitioner  appeared  newly  before  Asoju,  he was as thin as a 
whip owing to the perturbations  of his breast. His wife made  
his eyes see hell. She was disobedient,  disrespectful,  
incessantly  bickering,  sauntered  out of the home  and returned






THE  THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
as she pleased.  It was she who  gave  orders  to her husband.
'The  teacher  who had become  disaffected  with  teaching  
and wished  to become  a clerk  found himself  a clerk  indeed,  but 
when he began,  his office  was filled with numerous  officials,  
among  them  a thousand  other  clerical  staff, and he the most  
junior  of them. His work did not go smoothly  as he did not 
possess  the talent  for the kind of work  he envied,  yet he would  
not walk  with the knowledgeable  ones  in the office,  preferring  
the company  of well-off  youth  without  a penny  in his pocket,  
those  who  do not rely on their  monthly  salary  alone  but receive  
supplementary  income  from  their  fathers.  All kinds  of people  
in this office constituted  a test for the man. When Asoju  
returned,  he found  him deeply  in debt.
'The man who earlier pleaded  that his superiors  should  
cease to move him from station  to station  anyhow  had not 
budged  from his last posting  since Asoju's  earlier  visit. For 
fourteen  full years  while  the Spirit had been in the heavenly  
abode, he had not changed  stations.  Nor was the town  
prominent,  it was in some  obscure  location,  thus no one ever 
heard  of the man again.  He remained  there  like a king among  
subjects,  arrogance  penetrated  through  to his heart,  and he 
began  to believe  that  there  was no being  like him. His work  did 
-not see daylight  beyond  those  confines,  and when his peers  
enjoyed  promotions,  no one remembered  him. Once  in a while  
.when  his superiors  came  to inspect  his work,  he carried  himself  
in a supercilious  manner  towards  them, he had no way of






IN THE  FOREST  OF OlODUMARE
knowing  that his work was not as valued  as those of other  
stations,  he sat in one spot,  never  emerged  into public  view,  he 
failed  to understand  that  anyone  who made  his living  room  the 
totality  of his environment  would  acquire  only  the knowledge  
of the room.  Where the man understood  the world  to be, the 
world  had long journeyed  beyond  it. When  Asoju-Olodumare  
re-visited,  and the man emerged  into the midst of the real 
world, he had retrogressed  beyond redemption,  he was 
covered  in embarrassment,  his walk was not the walk of 
humans,  it was morethe  walkof  an animal  in human  skin.
'Similar  to his fate was that of the man who lamented  
that his town was detestable,  and sought  another  as his 
hometown.  True, he did become  what  he desired  but, within  
three  years,  all this children  were  dead,  the climate  of the new 
town did not suit them.  His wife also perished  and, despite  it 
all, the townspeople  did not  take  to him and began  to conspire  
against  him. Food was more  expensive  than the eye, one yam 
tuber  cost one pound,  a Jerry-can  of palm  oil six pounds,  a pan 
of yam flour two pounds,  a cockerel  seven pounds.  The 
condition  of this man was so parlous  that he became  weary  of 
life and began  to crave  a transfer  to heaven.
'At the time of this second  visitation,  many  of the sick 
were  dead,  they lacked  the stamina  to bear  the new diseases 
for which  they  had opted.
'The seekers  after beauty lamented  their choices  
intensely,  those  who felt that their  heads  were too big ended






Im THIRD  DAY WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  UVE5  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY^I ^I
with heads  no bigger  than oranges,  those  who felt that their i 
legs were too thin received  legs closer  to an elephant's,  a '
change  from small eyes landed  some with eyes large as a 
clock's  face,  others  who had opted  for smaller  had eyes  the size 
of chickens...  everything  was topsy-turvy,  higgledy-  piggeldy,  
for the King of Heaven  had not created  the fullness  of these  
beings  to fit the proportions  of the part substitutes  they now 
demanded.
'When  each and everyone  among  the children  of earth  
had had their say, repudiating  their former  choices  and 
pleading  for a return  to what they formerly  were,  the Spirit  
from Heaven  burst into laughter  and spoke. "You children  of 
earth,  do you not know  that the wisdom  of The Caretaker  of 
humanity  is greater  than the rest of creation?  Go and observe  }
the leaves  on a tree, go and take a look at the beasts  of the ■ I
forest,  as numerous  and strong  as they are, they follow  the ''
path that the Creator  has stamped  on th^ soles of their feet.  ^
Kegard  the numerous  species  of fish, regard  the frog which  '
iives on earth  and also in the water.  Do you not know  that the i i 
Being who created  all these  is far beyond  the rest of creation?
You children  of earth, if you are preparing  yourselves  to 
^advance  your existence,  that is a good thing,  but when  your  
language  is in belittlement  of God, you are like the handiwork  
of a carver  which has eyes but cannot  see, has nostrils  but 
•cannot  smell,  has ears but cannot  hear. The avaricious  cannot  
enjoy  a happy  condition  even if the world  shrinks  until it is no






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
i
t
Ibigger than a gourd. You to whom Olodumare  imparted  
wisdom  but do not use it, did you ever hear that the lion 
approached  the King  of Heaven  any day and asked  him to build  
a palace  for him - because  he is the king of the beasts?  Did you 
ever hear the spider  determine  never  again to spin threads?  
Ever  heard  the cock  refuse  to crow?  Cast  your  gaze on the birds  
in the sky, the crane  migrating  from  one place  to the next  every  
yea  r, the bush  fowl seeking  food  on the farm,  the bat using  the 
same  orifice  for eating  and excreting,  the cover  of some  birds  
are like white  wrapping,  others  like velvet,  others  like deep-  
dyed cloth, shimmering  black. Do you not discern  in these,  
great  marvels?
' "Dedicate  yourselves  to advancement  in all things  
good,  but restrain  yourselves  from  stretching  out to reach  what  
your arms cannot  grasp.  The moment  a child begins to evince  
signs  of covetousness  is the moment  his parents  should  berate  
him - not only the parents,  but all the family.  Covetousness  is 
the sibling of envy, of both envy and jealousy.  Therefore,  
children  of earth,  pay heed  to these  things.  I return  to heaven  
this day. God has additionally  commanded  that I return  you to 
your  former  conditions. Good-bye.  From  this day, you shall see 
me no more, continue  to manage  your world,  a human  .is 
different  from  an angel,  the dwellers  on earth  are not the same 
as the dwellers  of heaven.
' "Thus  did Asoju-Olodumare  take his leave,  no more  .to






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  UVE5  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
return.  Take this as a lesson  in wisdom,  you, Olowo-aiye,  my 
good  friend."
On this note Baba Onirugbon-yeuke  ended his 
discourse,  after which we rose from the roof terrace  of his 
house and descended  the storey building  to engage in 
pastimes.  It was not yet dark  at the time of this exchange,  and 
when my friend  considered  for a long time what we might  
embark  upon  to divert  ourselves,  he proposed  that  we visit  the 
home  of Disease  that was the wife of Iku, but I rejected  the 
offer.  When  I visited  the home  of the husband  earlier,  the home  
did not especially  attract  me; to have encountered  Death  and 
then proceed  to visit Disease  did not strike  me as a lightweight  
matter.
So we climbed  up the balcony  once  more.  After  settling  
down for some time in silence,  I rose and stood at akimbo,  
thrust  my hands  in my pocket  as when  book  educated  men try 
to show  off, and when  1 had paced  up and down  for a while,  I 
again eased my buttocks  into a chair, linked hands  over my 
crossed  legs, and sat back in the chair, then told the Furry-  
Bearded-One  that  I wished  to hear  more  from  his lips.
The man obliged,  saying,  'My  dear  Olowo-aiye,  you are a 
show-off  of a man,  a man among  men,  I salute  your  enjoyment  
of this home  of mine. Olowo-aiye,  I shall  tell you a little story,  
maybe  you will extract  a lesson  or two  from  it.
'Once  there  was a king who asked  his wife to prepare  
some  stew  for him. A short  while  later,  the wife brought  three






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
\
I
i i
* IIfishes  to the king one was black,  another  red and the third,  
white. The sight greatly  astonished  the king who however  
ordered  the wife to cook  them. A short  while  later  the wife re­
appeared,  breathless.  She told him, "Kabiyesi,  I have 
encountered  trouble  this day. in the process  of cooking,  I was 
about  to stir the stew  on the fire when  the wall split  in two and a 
woman  appeared  sword  in hand and overturned  the cooking  
pot. That is the sum of all I witnessed,  Kabiyesi,  because  the 
next moment  I had slumped  to the ground  and fainted.  When  I 
recovered,  and looked around,  the fishes had changed  
completely  and were  black  as pitch."
'When  the woman  finished  her account,  the king rose,  
saying,  'Lead on, come and show me the fishes',  and both  
proceeded  to the scene.  When  they  arrived  at the kitchen,  the 
king saw that the fishes had indeed  changed  colour,  turned  
black  as the cooking  pot. It could not fail to astonish  anyone  
who saw them.  Quickly  the king sent for the fisherman  and 
ordered  him to return  and bring back three  such fishes  once 
more.
'Before  long the fisherman  returned  with three  fishes  
just like the others  before.  The king  accompanied  his wife  to the 
kitchen  and ordered her  to start  cooking  the fishes  right  before  
his eyes. As the woman  commenced  cooking,  with the king 
crouched  hawk-eyed  over the hearth,  the fish stew began  to 
simmer  and the woman  picked up the spoon to stir it. No 
sooner  did the ladle  touch  the fish however  than  the wall of the






TH£ THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  UVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
room  split  in two. Instead  of the woman  however,  it was a hefty  
man who emerged  sword  in hand  and overturned  the pot.  The 
king collapsed  on the ground,  his crown  fell off and skeddadled  
all over  the floor.  The king fainted, the wife fainted, the palace  
servants  who had accompanied  him passed  out, not to recover  
consciousness  until a light breeze  fanned  across  the kitchen.  
My good friend,  can you see that a happening  which  knocked  
out the wife and knocked  out the husband  is no lightweight  
matter?
'When  the king regained  his senses,  he went into the 
palace,  sent again  for the fisherman  and asked  him once  again 
to go and procure  another  set of such  fishes.  The man  complied  
and again brought  back the unusual  catch. Each time he 
received  the order,  he was overjoyed,  since the king was not 
niggardly  in rewarding  him.
'When  the fisherman  returned  with his catch,  the king 
sent for his chiefs  to report  at the palace.  When  they were  all 
assembled, he narrated  what  his eyes  had seen,  and added  that 
he wanted  them all to be witnesses  at the occurrence.  The 
chiefs  thanked  him and with one voice  replied,  "Owner of the 
royal’mandate,  companion  of the deities,  we shall wait here
t
and have the event manifest  itself before  our eyes." Soon 
enough,  the wife appeared  and whispered  to the king that the 
fisherman  was back  with his fishes.  The king  ordered  that he be 
brought  before  him and when  the man appeared,  he said to 
him, "My friend,  this affair  has moved beyond  secrecy.  Bring






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
out  the fishes  so we can cook  them."
'So they began  to cook  the fishes.  When  it was time to 
turn the stew,  one of the nobles  took  the ladle and, just as he 
attempted  to start stirring,  the wall split open as before  and 
this time, seven of these stalwarts  emerged,  double-edged  
swords  in hand and proceeded  to overturn  the pot. The rest 
was mayhem  I Chiefs  collided  with chiefs,  queens  with queens,  
the king leapt  through  the window,  his royal agbada  billowing  
like sails  as he fled.
'When  he had eventually  recovered  his composure,  he 
resolved  in himself  to unravel  the mystery  of these fishes,  
fishes which had determined  that no one must cook them  
except  he was prepared  to run for dear life. He sent to the 
fisherman  to prepare  himself  for the following  morning  when  
he would  lead his court  and himself to the stream  where  he 
netted  these  fishes.
'The following  morning,  the chiefs reported  at the 
palace,  prepared  to pay a visit to this stream,  led by the 
fisherman.  It was a surprise  to everyone  that they had not 
walked  for more than three hours  when  they arrived  at the 
mystery  waters,  yet none  of them  had ever  set eyes  on it at that 
very  spot.  They  skirted  its borders  and discovered  that  it was an 
isolated  pool.  Walking  up and down  its banks,  they  found that 
the pool was luminous  like a mirror,  they could  see the fishes  
clearly as they swam in formation  and in all directions.  
However,  how  the water  had gathered  and flowed  to arrive  at
B






THE  THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
that spot remained  obscure.  Every fish differed  from all the 
fishes  they had known  - the matter  completely  floored  their  
combined  wisdom.  After  a while,  night  fell, the group  prepared  
to sleep on the banks  of the pool and soon fell asleep.  The 
moon  was like broad  noontide,  yet they  all slept,  all except  the 
king, who continued  to toss restlessly  because  he could not 
fathom  the mystery  of the pool.
'In the end, he could  no longer  bear  it. He rose,  woke  up 
his second-in-command  and informed  him he was going to 
seek  the answer  to the mystery,  if he was not back by daylight,  
his deputy  was to inform  the people  that he was a little tired  
•and had gone to sleep in a hurriedly  improvised  hut not far 
Trom  the pool.  After  the king had made  ail arrangements,  he set 
,his head to the forest,  he and his Maker,  and began  to explore  
the surrounding.
'After  wandering  aimlessly  in the moonlight, he espied  a 
huge building  whose  interior  was lit. it was a stunning  edifice,  
lovelier  than even his own palace.  Its door were open,  so, he 
entered.  He began to look around  in case he would meet  
someone,  and it was during  his search  that he heard  someone  
sobbing  in one of the rooms.  The sobs came from a good-  
jooking  man  who  was seated  in a chair.
'Having  greeted  the man 'Pele o', he went on to ask, 
"What  on earth  could  be the matter  that makes  you weep and 
yo,u, a grown-up  man?"






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
'The man answered  him, "True, but if you knew the 
circumstances  in which  I find myself,  you would  not speak  in 
that  fashion."
'To which  the king replied,  "Then  do not fail to let me 
know  what ails you, for who knows,  the King of Heaven  may 
grant  that  I am equal  to the task  of bringing  you relief."
'Thereupon  the man embarked  upon  his story,  "i am the 
grieve-with-thinking  victim of a man who has suffered  much  at 
the hands  of women.  Death seemed  preferable  to me than  
scorn.  I was once  a king and I had a wife on whom  I relied  to the 
limit, little knowing  that she was a deep-dyed,  consummate  
witch.  When  night  feli, and I had finished  dinner,  she slipped  
some knockout  preparation  into my drink, I would drink it, 
suspecting  nothing.  Its effect  was to make  me sleep  early,  and 
ensure  that I slept  soundly  till the following  morning  when  she 
herself  woke  me.
' "She indulged  in this practice  for a long time, while I 
remained  in ignorance.  May God^jrotect  us from dissembling  
women,  their tongues  are sweeter  than sugar-cane  juice and 
they  can flatter  a man beyond  any being  on earth,  their  knees 
are very far from the ground  and can curtsy  twenty  thousand  
and more  times  in a day. This depraved  woman  deceived  me 
numberless  times  until Edumare  exposed  her secret,  and this is 
how  it came  to pass.
' "One night,  when I was stretched  out on the ground,  
my eyes shut without  actually  falling asleep, something






THE  THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE, WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
occurred.
' "Two of my house maids were chatting  with each 
Other.  One said to the other,  'What  a pity, this man will never  
suspect  that his wife serves  him some portion  in his water  
every  night.'  The other  replied,  'It is an astonishing  matter,  but 
what  a powerful  drug it must  be. The moment  our master  sips 
it, he passes  out. He does not wake  up until  the woman  herself  
wakes  him up.' The other  added,  'Yes, only when  our m“aster  
has fallen  asleep  does she venture  out, and returns  only with 
cockcrow.'
' "In this manner  did these two carry on their  
conversation,  little dreaming  that all that they said was 
securely  in the palms  of my hand. My mind began  to churn  
violently.
' "When  it was  time  for me to sleep  I lay on my couch  and 
pretended  to have fallen instantly  asleep.  I did not sleep  
however,  and this was because  when I had my dinner  that 
night,  1 did not drink  the water  that  the woman  had placed  on 
the table but threw  it out of the window  when  she was not 
looking.  The moment  1 lay on my bed that  very night,  my wife 
put out the lamp  in our room,  rose,  threw  an alligator  pepper  in 
her mouth,  chewed  and spat it over me, and uttered  the 
words;  'When  the ceiling  beam sleeps,  it does not rise. You 
dunderhead,  you shall  not wake  until I have  returned.'
' "This done, she set out on her way, while I quickly






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
picked up my machete  and quietly followed  her. The 
astonishing  part was that all the doors  in the house  began  to 
open of their  own accord  before  her, without her use of a key. 
However,  as she moved,  I also  followed.
' "After  a while,  she gained  the outside  compound  and I 
trailed  her. She left the town  boundaries  completely  but I stuck  
to her. After  a while,  she took a turn along  the road, I took  the 
same  turn after  her, and some  distance  later,  came  to a clearing  
which  was paved  smooth.  On arrival,  she met a man with a 
white, voluminous  agbada,  richly embroidered  by skilled  
craftsmen,  it was most  extravagantly  ornate.  The moment  my 
wife appeared,  he began to express his displeasure,  
complaining,  'You are  very  late today.  If you knew  you could  not 
come  today,  why  didn't  you simply  say so yesterday?  I don't  like 
that anyone  should  preen themselves  at my expense  - this 
must  never  be repeated.'  My wife immediately  knelt  down  and 
began to appease  him, pleaded  with him not to be angry, 
explained  that I had taken  a while  to fall asleep,  clung  to him 
and they  began  to kiss passionately.
' "It did not take long before  they embarked  on the 
subject  of myself,  taking'turns  to revile  me as they regaled  each 
other,  spoke  of me with derision  for their  entertainment,  called  
me names that neither  my father ever bestowed  on me. 
Infuriated,  I drew  my machete  and plunged  between  them like 
lightning.  I slashed  at the man and he fell to the ground,  my wife 
took to her legs so fast, she did not even know  that I was the






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
assailant.  After  this, I returned  home,  regained  my bed and fell 
asleep.
' "Soon  after, my wife returned  and also climbed  onto  
the bed and slept by me. When day broke the following  
morning,  I pretended  that  nothing  untoward had occurred.  My 
wife it was that first greeted  me, she fell on her knees  and 
bowed  her head  to the ground,  but when  she wanted  to kiss me 
with that same mouth that she had kissed the man of 
embroidered  robes,  I demurred.  I turned  my head  to one side,  
murmuringthat  I had a sore mouth.
' "When  it was time for breakfast,  I ate, then sat on a 
favourite  chair. My wife came in, saying,  'Kabiyesi,  to whom  
authority  belongs,  second  of the gods,  the head  of an elephant  
that is no load for a child,  a father  who is preeminent  among  
fathers,  the ruler  of the town,  head of all nobility,  the man of 
men among  men, the man of consequence  above men of 
consequence,  the authentic  being among men of 
wholesomeness,  the man who emerges  and the hearts of 
people  are gladdened,  my own true lord, it is you I parade  to 
boost  my standing.  Kabiyesi,  I thank  you, I thank  you greatly,  I 
thank  you for the care you take of me, when  I look on you, all 
other  men seem  ugly beside you in the whole  wide  world,  you 
are my deity,  may  the good  Lord grant  that  we continue  to reap 
benefits  from  our mutual  co-existence.
'Not to prolong  matters,  my lord, I have an important  
favour  to ask of you. A senior  sister of mine who travelled






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
outside  the borders  returned  only  a day before  yesterday.  1 had 
intended  to see her yesterday  but found no time - all the 
visitors  who came  yesterday  left me no time at all - only to 
receive  a message  this morning  that my sister  had died. It was 
shattering  news,  Kabiyesi,  someone  on whom  I had not set eyes 
for three  years!  Now to be left only her lifeless  form! It is.a 
matter  of deep  sorrow.  Now  what  I seek  from  you is to grant  me 
a site in the palace  where  I can dig a grave for the burial  of my 
sister,  a resting-place  for her on which  I can gaze from  time to 
time,  for this loss has assailed  my body  intensely.  Kabiyesi,  may  
God grant  you long life.' These were  the very  words spoken  by 
my wife, she who was the Queen  Mother  among  the king's  
wives.  However,  I had no suspicion  whatsoever that the man 
whom I had caught  with her in the moonlight  was the one 
whom she was now presenting  as her sister. I therefore  
granted  her request  and even assigned  a few of my retainers  to 
accompany  her.
' "When  the woman  returned  and brought  back the 
corpse  into the palace,  I took  a look  at it and it turned  out to be 
none other  than the man whom  I had seen with her in the 
middle  of the night when  they kissed  each other  - may God 
protect  us from  the fraudsters  of this modern  world  whom  this 
world's  progeny  present  as their  brothers, impostors  that  they  
cosset  as their  flesh and blood,  whom  they pamper  as is the 
entitlement  of relations.  They  are liars,  the day  that  the cord of 
deception  is loosened,  the genuine  relations  will not fail to






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
reveal  themselves.
' "When I cast my eyes  on this corpse,  it was  full of blood.  
I re-entered  my room,  picked  up my machete  and hid it under  
my clothing. I then  called  out to my wife and when  she entered,  
she found me on the same chair on which I had earlier  sat. 
When this wife put in appearance,  her countenance  had 
changed  towards  me, little  did I know  that  she had seen  all that 
I did behind  her back, since  she was a witch.  So she was fully 
prepared  for me, and the moment  I began,  laughing,  to say to 
her, 'Welcome  back, I hope  your  fake sibling  is in good health',  
all I saw was her set face confronting  mine.  She threw  some  
fluid over my body and screamed  at the top of her voice. I 
shuddered  and she pronounced  her sentence:  'It is my will that 
a transformation  overtakes  you, this man,  who dares  mock  my 
beloved,  that you change  to stone from your feet to the 
mounds  of your buttocks,  that you remain  as you are until the 
day that I release  you. When  the yam alters  form,  it turns  into 
pounded  yam,  when  corn changes  shape  it turns  into porridge,  
even if in the end I shall reap the rewards  of my works  at the 
hands  of the throngs  of heaven,  I shall not fail to exert the 
powers  given by the Creator  to the witches  of the earth to 
inflict  on you the direst  suffering.' '
' "As she uttered  these  words,  I felt as if from my feet to 
the rise of my buttocks  there were no bones,  no flesh, no 
muscle,  no blood  - all had congealed  into stone,  and I had no 
control over  them.  Since  that day I have remained  on this spot,  
unable  to change back  into what  I was.  1 do not eat, nor  do I feel






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
hungry,  yet I have  remained  alive."
'His story  concluded,  he lifted his robes,  and when  the 
king looked,  it was indeed  as he said only  from  the waist  to the 
head  was he flesh,  bones  and blood.  From  the waist  to the-soles  
of his feet,  it was all solid  rock.
'The king then asked  him where  his witch  of a wife was 
to be found  and the man replied,  "My good friend,  I do not 
know  where  she is exactly,  one thing  I do know  is that  from  the 
day of the alteration  of my condition  into that  in which  you find 
me, she has used  the powers  of her witchcraft  to transform  my 
kingdom  into the stagnant  pool which  you see yonder.  Only  
three  types  of fish will be found  in that pool, they represent  
three  groups  of people  in the town:  one represents  Christians,  
the second  Moslems,  and the third are the unbelievers.  Since  
the day that she did these  things,  she dug a hole, somewhat  
deep,  into which  she deposited  the corpse  of her lover  whom  I 
beheaded.  She did not cover the corpse with earth but 
wrapped  it in a shroud,  and her belief  is that  the corpse  will one 
day resurrect  and her lover  will rise and  rejoin  her. But the part 
thatwill  shock  you most  of all I must  tell you.
' "Every  morning  just before  dawn,  the woman  comes 
into this house,  around  five in the morning,  with a bundle  of 
whips,  and once here,  she starts  to flog me. Not until she has 
administered  a hundred  lashes does she stop. After 1;his 
exertion,  she then  goes  to the pit where  her love is deposited  
and addresses  him thus, 'My friend  of earth  and my friend  qf






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHO  LIVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
heaven, when shall  you return to see me? On account  of you, I 
erased  an entire  city from the face of the earth,  for your  sake I 
have displaced  many  from their ruling  seats, my friend  of this 
world  and of the after,  when  are you returning  to see me?'  That  is 
her daily  song  of lamentation.  When  she has flogged  me to her 
satisfaction  while  I scream  in agony,  she goes  to her dead  fake 
sibling  and pleads  with him to leave  heaven  and return  to earth  
to be united  with  her."
'When the man had thus  spoken,  the listening  king was 
deeply  touched.  In the first place,  he was moved  to learn  of the 
horrendous  suffering  meted out to the man, rendered  
immobile on the same  spot,  yet at the same time he was  glad 
that he had found  what  he came  seeking,  he had seen  the pool,  
and now understood  the meaning  of the three  fishes.  He then  
asked the man, "Friend,  is the woman  certain  to come this 
dawn?"  The man  replied,  "Absolutely."
'After  this, the king devised  a strategy.  He took a small  
firearm  and hid it in the pocket  of his trousers  and proceeded  to 
the graveside  of the woman's  lover  that  was within  the palace.  
Arrived  at the grave,  he observed  how efficiently  the corpse  
had been tied. He untied it, gathered  the bones  from the 
skeleton  and threw  them away. Next, he carefully  wrapped  
himself  in the shroud,  but loosely.  Next he positioned  his 
firearm  in his right  hand  and lay still, contemplating  the world.
'Sure enough,  just as dawn  was breaking,  the woman  
arrived  and proceed  to whip  her husband,  not ceasing  until  the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
count had reached  a hundred.  The husband  shed hot tears,  
sighed deeply  dolorous  sighs, pleaded  for mercy but the 
woman  did not desist,  she had forgotten  the existence  of the 
King of Heaven.  When she had completed  her husband's  
flagellation,  she moved  to the* graveside  of her beloved  and 
cried,  as was her wont:
' "My beloved  of earth,  and beloved  of heaven,  when  
will you return  and see me? On your  account  I have erased  an 
entire  city, on your  account  I removed  people  from  their  ruling  
positions,  my beloved  of earth,  my beloved  of heaven,  when  
will you return  and see me?"
'Upon  which  the king who was in the hole replied,  "My 
beloved  of earth, my beloved  of heaven,  I am here in the 
outskirts  of heaven.  The gatekeeper  does  not open  the gate,  he 
has shut  the gate of heaven  against  me. If you wish  that I rejoin  
you, you must  first restore  your  husband  to his human  form  sq 
that he is as he was before,  only  then will the gatekeeper  open  
the gates,  and I shall  be reunited  with  you."
'At this response  the woman's  heart rejoiced  so much  
that, in her rushito  fetch the charms  that would  restore  her 
husband,  her headgear  flew off, her wrapper  unwound  and it 
remained  only her underwear  as she raced on her mission.  
When  she had obtained  some  water,  she poured  some  portion  
into it, threw  it on her husband  and intoned, "I order  you to rise 
and begin to walk at will. The head is not so heavy  that it 
crushes  the neck under  with its burden,  the body is not so






THE THIRD  DAY  WITH  BABA  ONIRUNGBON-YEUKE,  WHOUVES  ON THE  ROCK  PROMONTORY
heavy  that the owner  cannot  lift it." As she chanted  these  
words,  the man's  legs that had been  stone  returned to human  
flesh  and the man  stood  up.
'That done, the woman  returned  to the grave of her 
lover,  crying,  "You whom  I love beyond  all the humanity  of this 
world,  the task  you set me is done."
'The king, ensconced  in the hole then replied,  "Only  one 
task remains.  Go, restore  the pool of water  to its prior  condition  
as a city, turn the fishes  back into the townspeople  they  were,  
then I shall step out as the king of that  town  and you will be my 
queen  consort,  head  of all my queens,  you shall  wear  a crown  of 
coins,  you shall  wear  robes  of beads,  and even  so shall male  and 
female  retainers  come  and  go in obedience  to your  wishes."
. 'When  the woman  heard  this, she ran again  to prepare  
and apply  the concoctions  - instantly  a reversal  took  place.  The 
pool of water  became  a town and the fishes  human  beings.  
They sold and bought  as in a market,  they moved  hither  and 
thither.  Then the woman  returned  to the king whom she 
imagined  was her lover.  When  she arrived  she called  out, "My 
beloved,  I have  done  as you commanded,  you who are my lord 
and master."
'Then the king replied saying, "I am here, I have  
returned  from heaven,  you principal  love of my life, descend  
into  the pit and help me up."
'The woman  jubilated  when she heard  this, retrieved  
her wrapper  and tied it on elegantly,  picked  up her headgear






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
and styled  it rakishly  it to one side, entered  the pit to be united  
with the man she imagined  was her lover. The king ensured  
that  she came  very  close,  waited  until he could  see her clearly,  
pointed  the gun at her chest,  and pulled  the trigger.  The gun 
roared,  the body  of the evil-doer  hit the ground  with a thud,  
she died on the spot,  lay motionless.  Thus  did the evil-headed  
end her portion  on earth, the moon of malevolence  was 
shrouded  in darkness,  the secretof  a worthless  being  scattered  
in the open.  The verdict  of it all is understood  throughout  the 
habitations  of men: even when an evil-doer  is sinking  deep  
roots,  the good  should  not change  their  ways  on this account,  a 
day of reckoning  approaches  for those  whose  stock-in-trade is 
wickedness,  a day when even the innocent  around  him will 
nearly  shed  tears  of pity. Is it not the elders  who say that  every






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE FURRY-BEARDED-ONE  
WHOSE  DWELLING  IS ON THE 
PROMONTORY  OF ROCKS
i
T
As Baba  Onirungbon,  the Furry-bearded-one,  ended  his 
tale, one of his servants  entered  from  the ground  floor  
of the house to inform  him that he had visitors,  so we 
all descended  to see who  these  visitors  were.
It was a surprise  when  we arrived  to find that  the guests  
were not simply  two or three but quite numerous.  When I 
counted  them  they  turned  out to be twenty-four.  When  Baba  
Onirugbon  had greeted  them and asked how their feet had 
directed  them there,  they explained  that they had lost their  
way inside Igbo Olodumare,  so, he welcomed  them all over 
again  and offered  them  the hospitality  of his home.
When  they had settled  down in their quarters  for the 
night,  I also rose and went  to offer  my greetings.  Only  then  did I 
observe  that among  them  were  several  whom  I had known  at 
home,  I had  simply  failed  to look  closely  at them  earlier  on.
The first person  of whom I took  notice  was a man  whose  
name was Ijambaforiti  and was an elephant  hunter.  A very 
famous man, because  when he first began hunting,  he 
performed  a notable  feat that created  great astonishment  in 
our town.  Ijambaforiti  was ambling along  one day when  spied  
the trunk  of an elephant  in the valley.  He took  out an arrow  and






18 ( IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Stabbed  the trunk  forcefully  so that the arrow  entered  deeply  
in it. The elephant  seized  Ijambaforiti  and flung him onto a 
treetop.  When the elephant  looked up and again saw 
Ijaaibaforiti  now trapped on the tree, it uprooted  the tree.  
When the tree collapsed,  if fell on the elephant  and 
Ijambaforiti  landed  on the elephant's  head, so he took out 
another  arrow  and stabbed  the beast  with it. As the elephant  
tossed  Ijamba  to the ground,  he sustained  injuries,  but no one 
knew this at home for the three days it took him to raise 
himself.  To cut a long story  short, the elephant  died,  and from  
that  day he was known  as Ijambaforiti,  the tamer  of elephants.  
When  I had taken  a longer  look and was certain  it was he, and 
he also looked  keenly  at me and was satisfied  it was I, we 
greeted  each other with great joy, I with his accolade,  
'Ijambaforiti,  Elephant  Tamer'  while  he replied,  'I am that man  
among  men indeed.'  I burst  into laughter  and hailed  him again- 
'ijambaforiti.  Master  of Elephants'  and he moved closer, 
replying,  'It is I indeed,  I place  myself  in your hands.'  When  he 
came  close  to me he began  to tease  me, pressed  his fingers  in 
my stomach  and cried,  'Olowo-aiye,  this is some  paunch  you've  
grown,'  to which  I could  only  reply,  'What  else Is a man  to do?'
As ijambaforiti  and,  I indulged  in banter,  I saw a relation  
of mine, an in-law,  whose  name was Enia-se-pele.  He vyas 
married  to the daughter  of a senior  member  of one of our 
family  extensions  who was related  on my mother's  side. He 
was an extremely  wise  man  and was very  much  beloved  by the






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
members  of our household.  At the time that I prepared  to 
venture  into Igbo Olodumare,  he was  preparing  the funeral  of 
his father,  Iwatutu,  a very important  personage  in our town.  A 
man of^reat  repute  was.Enia-se-pele,  also abundantly  blessed 
with  good  looks. Enia-se-pele  was extremely  handsome.  It was 
in my very  presence  that  twelve  women  were  offered  to him in 
marriage  at the same time,  but he did not marry  any of them.  
He was very  prudent  indeed,  and even though  young  women  
drifted  in and out of his house  day and night,  he married  none  
after he had espoused  this daughter  of my elder relation  of 
whom  I have been  speaking.  He was the one in our household  
who often  sang:  'One  woman,  lots of enjoyment;  two women,  
two problems;  three women,  three problems;  four women,  
five problems;  six women,  six problems,  seven  women,  seven 
problems...'  And so on and on.
When Enia-se-pele  and I recognized  each other, we 
embraced  warmly  and he told me many  things.  And it was in 
the midst  of this sharing  of Joys that I observed  a man  who had 
begun  to laugh.  When  I moved  among  the guests  and stared  
closely  at him, it was another  person  I knew. This was an 
extremely  pigheaded  man and his behaviour  no better  than  an 
animal's.  His conduct  was that of a goat's,  and this led to the 
townspeople  referring  to him as a Baboon  of a goat. Idiocy  on 
two legs. He loved  nothing  better  than  to laugh  incessantly.  He 
proved  incapable  of thought  even  for one day, and so whenever  
someone  behaved  in a stupid fashion  in out town,  the custom






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
was to compare  him with  the Goat-Baboon,  Idiocy  on two legs. 
Goat-Baboon  was the one who cooked  for his wife in their  
home.  When  he had pounded  yam,  turned  the farina  paste  and 
made  the stew, he would place it before  his wife, while the 
latter  hissed  to indicate  that the food was below  expectation,  
and begin to berate  him. A degenerate  man was Goat-Baboon,  
one of those  who could  never  distinguish  when  they  are being  
ridiculed.  If they are dressed  in a filthy  buba  and you express 
admiration  for the sanyan  outfit  on their back, assuring  them  
that it was richer than the king's robes, they beam with 
happiness.  If you encountered  them  at a public  gathering,  they  
would  ask persistently,  'Did it strike  you that my contribution  
was more brilliant  than those  of all the others?'  This was the 
nature  of Goat-Baboon,  and so when  I came  up to him, I barely  
accorded  him a nasal  grunt.
Another  whom  I soon identified  as someone  known  to 
me was a diviner  called  Ewedaiyepo.  This man possessed  a vast 
armoury  of medicines  and charms  and was known  to all up and 
down  the town. He spent  seven  days in a hole in the ground  
when  he took  a ghommid  to wife before  they  became  divorced.  
There  was no leaf of the forest  that this man did not know  and 
no medication  was missing  from  his pouch.  He conversed with 
trees, understaod  the language  of animals,  of birds, and the 
fishes  of the water.  When  I recognized  him, I began  to salute  
him by his praise-names:  'Leaves-unite-the-world,  healer  of 
the world,  Leaves-unite-the  world,  healer  of heaven,  stalwart.






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
master  among  diviners,  a thousand  and forty  spirits of a man.  
Leaves-unite-the-world,  ever so casually,  you became-lord  of 
them  all, one who  as if in jest became  the father  of ghommrds,  
you who turned  the succubus  into a house servant,  wears  
underpants  of amulets,  Leaves-unite-the-world,  you are the 
father  of all, it Js you we shall install,  you are the father  of 
elders,  we shall install  no one but you, anyone who  thinks  he's 
cock-of-the-walk  will swagger  his way  into disgrace.'
Thus did I chant  his praise-names  as he nodded  from  
time to time and threw in the occasional  gesture of 
acknowledgment.  No sooner  did I stop  than I saw Ewedaiyepo  
pour  out a whitish  unguent  from  his gourdlet  and rub my head 
with it. My head turned  white,  Ewedaiyepo  turned  me into a 
hoary-head  in broad  day light,  and afterwards  everyone  stared  
at my head at every encounter.  If only he had used a dark 
unguent,  it would  at least have gone,  with the colour  of my 
head! Unplanned,  I turned  into a-soap-hunter  all.over  the 
place  - I must  have  used  a full pennyworth  before  I got rid of my 
prematurely  whitened  hair.
The next  acquaintance  to come  in view  was a man  called  
Ibanuje-isale.  I did not greet him with any warmth  because 
from  the day I first knew  him, I never  did find a wisp  of laughter  
on his lips. He was one of those  who have  this habit  of wearing  
a face of gloom no matter  what, no one can ever tell the 
difference  between  their seasons  of happiness  and 
unhappiness.  This kind of behavior  gives one a bad name.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
fritters  away  one's  increase,  it reduces  a man of importance  to 
a lesser  being. Any man of good  character  who sees that this 
habit  is becoming  his own is well advised  to part company  with 
it, for it is a blemish  in a person.  When  I saw Ibanuje-isale,  I 
acknowledged  him only with a narrowed  eye, when  I greeted  
him, itwas  as one would  greet  a man  of no consequence.
As I was passing  over Ibanuje-isale,  I saw someone  
whom  I knew  exceedingly  well.  This man loved  to sing as much  
as he loved talking,  earning  himself  the name Olohun-duru.  
When  I looked  in his direction  and was certain  that it was he, I 
said, 'My friend,  worthy  Olohun-duru,  what  a long  time it has 
been.' In turn he replied,  'Ho, Olowo-aiye,  I place myself  in 
your hands.  Again  I hailed  him, 'Olohun-duru  who  sings like a 
bird!'  to which  he replied,  ‘Olohun-iyo,  there  is nothing  amiss, 
rock-solid  stands  a man's  body,  I greet  you eating,  I greet  you 
drinking,  I greet you wining  and dining  without  asking  our 
whereabouts.'  We further  exchanged  warm salutations  and 
indulged  in a bout of bantering.  However,  he was a very 
garrulous  man; if one intended  to stop for two minutes,  he 
would  turn it into four, so when I had dawdled  until Olohun-  
duru pinned  me to the ground  with talking,  I simply  had to 
excuse  myself  from  the company.
Little did I know  that as I headed  for the door, Olohun-  
duru  kept  looking  at the back  of my head,  until  suddenly  I heard  
this man smack  his lips together  in a hiss and announce,  'Just 
look  at the back  of his head'.  When  I turned  round  I saw that it






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
was a nasty  gaze  he had fixed  on my retreating  head,  so I replied  
him, 'Why don't you find yourself  a seat? It is the* back of 
other's  heads  at which  people  can stare,  never  their  own.  You 
talk too much,  I do not have as much  idle time on my hands  as 
you, moderation is the norm.'
it is the most  notable among  the ones  with whom  I was 
acquainted  that I have mentioned  here. Furry-Bearded-One  
was lavish in his hospitality  towards  them, and when I 
considered  how much he had expended,  I was indeed  truly  
astonished.  When  a man of good breeding  goes to anywhere  
as guest,  he should  know  when  it is time to take his leave;  far 
too many people  do not know that excess  as unbecoming.  
When  the host has begun to extend  himself  over  generously,  it 
is time for the guest  to take his leave.  Even if the host insists 
that we remain,  we should  insist  and take our leave.  From this 
moment  that i saw  the lavishness  of my friend,  I resolved  that it 
was leave-taking  time.
When  we had finished  dinner  and we all sat on mats,  
spread  out seemingly  without  an end, chatting  under the 
moonlight  with the Furry-Bearded-One,  I initiated  talk of our 
departure,  I asked Furry Beard if he knew the direction  by 
which  we could  find our way home.  Furry-Beard  replied  saying, 
true indeed,  there  did exist  such  a path,  but it was one that  was 
filled with great dangers;  if we persisted,  it was certain  that 
many  of us would  perish  along  the way. When  I asked  that he 
offer us advice  on how to proceed,  he replied  that the best






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
advice  he could give us was that we remain  with him, find 
something  to occupy  us and live off the harvest  of our labour.  
To this Enia-se-pele  asked him to reveal what were the 
j difficultiesonthe  way, and my friend  proceeded  to enumerate  
them.  He said we would  traverse  the town of reptiles  where  
i I Ojola-ibinu,  the Boa-of-Fury  was king, that  we should  exercise
i I great  caution  while  in that  territory  or we might  lose our lives.
Next  there  was the grove  of seven  women  who spent  all their  
lives chasing  one another  around,  he warned  that if we looked  
in their  direction  and saw them  at play, like it or not, we would  
join in their game and would never depart  from there. He 
! ^ recounted  a number  ofjother  dangerous  prospects,  the terrible
i ghommids  and strange  birds, the man-eating  beasts and
poisonous  insects. Furry-Beard  listed all these brutal  
j r impediments  on the way if we indeed  persisted  in taking  our
leave.
i When he was done, Ijambaforiti  rose and began his
i j response:  'Mydearcolleaguesoneandall,  regard me  closely, I,
I //ambo/or/t/,theTamerofelephants.  Idonotturnfromdeath,  I
I do not turn  from  disease,  Ido not turn away  from  the misery  of
j
i : noon,  nor from the misery  of night.  I ask you all this day, can
1 : ' one gain anything of value  without confronting  hazards?  Ever
' seen  anyone  attain a position  of substance  without  having
*
I -j performed  something  of substance?  Whoever  exists in this
:i : world  and walks  with  fear  cannot  be counted  among  the living,
I , if all people  of great  status  spoke  of what  they have endured






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
before  they  attained  their  position  in life, many  would  pray  that 
they  die in positions  of lowliness.  Therefore,  go we must,  Furry-  
Bearded-One,  my dear  friend,  I thank  you for the care  you have 
taken  of us till now, may  God replenish  your  treasury.  All that is 
left for you to do for us now  is to describe  our route  clearly,  for if 
the Heavens  do not reject  an oath,  the next dawn  will not find 
us in this house.  There  is nothing  that man should  fear except  
God. Death  is preferable  to indignity  for the notable,  the well-  
bred  should  not walk  with  the feet  of greed,  if we visit  a strange  
land, we ought  to bring  home  the rewards  of the farm: it is a 
matter  of great  compulsion  that  we take  our leave.'
So spoke  Ijambaforiti,  and we all fell silent  as a vegetable  
field. Even as he took his buttocks  to his seat, he sprang  up 
again,  turned  to us and said, 'All of you, our dear people,  we 
leave  tomorrow,  follow  me, I shall lead you, start packing  your  
loads, steel your hearts,  we have men of repute  among  us 
Olowo-aiye,  a man of valour,  Enia-se-pele  is also here, a man of 
substance,  I also am present,  Ijambaforiti,  Master  of Elephants,  
God is with  us, we shall  go.'
When  Ijambaforiti  had taken his seat a second  time, I 
rose and backed  him up with my words.  I was followed  by 
Olohun-duru,  his voice  was so enticing  that  when  he sat down,  
Furry-Bearded  looked  in his face  and said, 'God  has coated  your  
lips with salt.' Thus  did we all resolve  that Furry-Beard should  
outline  the route  for us, and that  we would  set off the following  
morning,  God  willing.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
When  we had all spoken  with set faces,  Furry-Bearded-  
' One saw that our departure  was certain  and began to describe  
I our way home,  assuring  us that we would  indeed  set forth  the 
I following  morning.  He resolved  to render  all help  that lay in his
^ power.  He rose, and returned  with a flute and displayed  it,
asking  if there was any among  us who knew how to play it. 
j Olohun-duru  assured  him that he Was an adept.  He then placed  
the flute in the hands of Olohun-duru,  instructed  him that 
I when  we approached  the home  of the snakes  he should  begin  
to play the instrument,  and that when the guardians  of the 
road heard  its sound,  they  would  all fall asleep.  He warned  that 
these guards  were the most vicious  and that once we had 
bypassed  them,  the rest  was easy-  unless  we failed  to follow  all 
the guidance  he was offering.  He then warned  that it was 
totally  forbidden  to harm  any  snake  in this town,  pressing  it into 
our ears with seeming  adhesive.  Anyone  who killed  a snake  in 
the town  of snakes  would  not fail to find the war of snakes  - in 
any case, it was simply  the taboo  of the town.  He stressed  this 
repeatedly  because  on entering  the town,  we would  encounter  
myriad  species  of snakes  disporting  themselves  all over the 
place,  some  buying  and selling  in the market,  right before  our 
eyes.
Next he spoke  of Ojola-ibinu,  the Boa-of-Fury,  who was 
the king of the town of snakes,  described  him as the most  
vicious  of all the crawling  creatures  on earth,  thus  we must  take 
care not to antagonize  the town's  inhabitants  lest they  haul us






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
before  their intemperate  king. Our host-then  brought  .out a 
huge  gourd  which  he handed  to Ewedaiyepo,  the outside  of the 
gourd glistened  black,  the spines  of snakes  were  tied round-its  
neck  and all kinds  of feathers  used  to stuff  its mouth. The man 
informed Ewedaiyepo  that  the gourd  contained  the preventive  
antidote  for poisons  and that every  day on our way home,  we 
should take half a spoonful;  with this we would remain  
immune  to any snake-bite.  He warned  that this dosage  was 
■effective  for just one day's duration,  thus  we must  ensure  that 
we did not miss  one day  till we had reached  our destination.
Furry-Bearded-One  strove on our behalf. He even 
provided  us a flask  that  contained  some  water,  instructing  that 
whenever  we encountered  difficulties,  the watpr  would  be of 
great  help.  The water,  he said, came  from  a stream  that  flowed  
from heaven,  no one could  take  water  from  that  stream  except  
the dwellers  of heaven.  Nonetheless,  Furry-Beard  had been  
able to help himself  but, before he could, his eyes tasted  
pummeling.  Indeed  he revealed  that but for his friend  Iku, who 
dwelt  at the half-way  outpost  between  heaven  and earth,  he 
would not have  succeeded  in obtaining  a drop.  According  to.his  
account,  when he decided  to fetch some of this water, he 
borrowed  from Iku the costume  which  the dead wear  to the 
outskirts  of heaven, and so did Iku, before  they  could  approach  
the marvelous  stream  that flowed  across  heaven's  outskirts.  
The man revealed  that anyone  who sought  to scoop  water  
from  that stream  had to avoid  looking  into its waters,  the deed






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
must  b6 don6  with  thG b3ck  turnGd to thG strGam,  for whoGVGr  
turned  his face  to the  stream  would  surely  see  the throne  of the 
Lord of Glory  and the powerful  Spirits  who surrounded  the 
throne,  praising  their  Creator,  praising  Him  who  created  others,  
who  created  all. And for a certainty,  whoever  sets eyes  on the 
shadow  of God has pulled  down  disaster,  who ever  discovers  
the  seat  of the Creator  will never  know  what  has befallen  him.
The Furry-Bearded-One  reminded  us that  it was mystic  
water  in that  bottle  and that  there  was nothing  that  it could not 
do. If we sprinkled  it on foliage  and commanded  that  the leaves  
become  human,  it would  be so. If the command was  that  they  
turn  into  beasts,  it would  indeed  be so, for  the Logos  of the Lord  
was in the water.  However,  regarding  is usage,  Furry-Beard  
spoke  thus:  "When  you make  use of this water,  you must  have  
abstained  from oil, you must have abstained  from salt, you 
must  avoid  peppers,  and you must  be stark  naked,  just as you 
came  into  the  world  and how  you  shall  depart  hence.
In these  various  ways,  the Furry-Bearded-One  exerted  
his uttermost  on our behalf  and our gratitude  was Indeed  
heartfelt.  A man  of great  decency  was  the Furry-Bearded-One,  
he whose  dwelling  is on the rock promontory.  He took  care of 
us, he took exceeding  great  care  of us. When  it was dawn  the 
following  day and time  to depart  from  his home,  I nearly  wept,  
for I could  not think  of a single  thing  that I could  give to the 
retinue  of the house.  When  I searched  my pockets,  all I could  
find was three pence.  When  I searched  further  however,  I






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURRY-BEARDED...
found  the bean-cake  that  my mother  had given  me earlier  on, I 
broke  off a part of it and gave  it to them.  I had also retained  a 
pair of briefs,  I gave this to one my friend's  servants  but Furry-  
Beard was displeased  at these efforts that I made to 
recompense  his servants.  All the hospitality  that he had 
lavished on us counted  as nothing  in his eyes,  he was not one  of 
those beings  who give because  they expect  something  in 
return  from  men,  rather  his belief  was  that recompense  lies in 
the hands  of God. Anyone  who knows  this understands  that  
many are worthless  among  humans,  and that those who  
spread  largesse  in expectation  that such beneficiaries  even  
acknowledge  such open-handedness,  merely  rest their  backs  
against  empty  air. Don't  I recall  that when  the child of God  
himself  handed  a priceless  gift to the ten lepers,  only one  
returned  to give thanks? The children  of earth  love to harvest  
yams where  they have planted  no seedlings,  they ask for 
plantains  where  they  had stored  none,  those  who  would  never  
part with threepence  expect  others  to present  them with  
sixpence.  Therefore  I endeavoured  to the peak's  capstone  that  
my friend  should  know  that I appreciated  the rare  goodness  he 
extended  to me, and I was  glad  that  he saw  to it that,  when  the 
time  came  for parting,  our souls  did not also  take leave  of each  
other.  We continued  to write  letters  to each other,  and to this 
day I still receive  letters  from him. You will glimpse  a little of 
these  letters  as we proceed.
m






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
After our departure  from the home of the Furry-  
Bearded-One  who dwells  on the rock promontory,  our eyes  
recorded  numerous  vicissitudes.  Both those  that the mouth  
can recount  and others  which  it cannot  were  the staple  of our 
encounters,  but for the might  of God himself,  even  I would  not 
be here  to narrate  them.
On the afternoon  of the second  day of our departure  
from  our  friend,  around  three  o'clock, we arrived  at the border  
of the town  of snakes  where  the Boa-of-Fury  was  king.
When  it lacked a little  to the town,  we began  to hear  the 
cries of numerous  kinds  of birds,  and of squirrels.  When  we 
came  to a certain  broad  avenue,  we saw the sentries  of the 
road,  they  stood  staring  in our direction.  My buttocks  turned  to 
water  and my trouser  band  was loosened.  What  I found  truly  
intimidating  was that the sentries  were  close  to human,  to a 
little extent.  Their  heads  were  exactly  like humans'  but the rest  
of their  body  was  all reptilian.  They  had two  short  legs  on which  
they  walked  normally,  but their  tail was long,  and their  bodies  
were covered  in large scales.  There  was none that did not 
measure  up to formidable  size among  these  guards;  they  were  
indeed  most  terrifying.
The moment  we came  within  sight of them,  Olohun-  
duru  began  to play his flute,  they  all fell asleep  and we passed  
through.  It pains  me to say however  that  it was here  that  Goat-  
Baboon  lost his life. On the day we rose  and began  our  journey  
to the City  of Snakes,  we also began  to take  the preventive  that






LEAVE-TAKING  FROM  THE  FURY-BEARDED...
Furry-Bearded-One  had prescribed,  but Goat-Baboon  
protested  that  the potion  was  too bitter,  and he refused  to join  
us that morning.  When  we approached  the sentries'  position,  
he said that he needed  to defecate  in the bushes.  We waited  
for him  to complete  the  Job but,  when  he appeared  to be taking  
too long,  we walked  on ahead.  As we were  crossing  the barrier,  
the guards  saw him approaching  from below,  but we were  
confident  that they would  not stir until he also had crossed  
over. However  Baboon-Goat  began  to shout  and his voice  
shook the entire forest. When his noise had become  
unbearably  deafening,  the two guards  were aroused  and 
immediately  bit him. Instantly  the  venom  took  hold  and,  not to 
stretch  the mat  beyond  the  floor,  that  was  where  Baboon-Goat  
breathed  his last.
That  was how  we came  to lose one of our people,  the 
Goat-Baboon,  Simpleton  Personified.  But while we fell to 
sobbing,  Ijambaforiti  did not cry at all, instead  he began  to 
whistle  and sing  to the proverb  that  went,  'The  blind  man  who  
shut  his eyes  and complained  that  he cannot  see,  when  he was  
awake,  what could he see? The self-destructive  has only  
brought  his fate on himself  - his point  being  that Baboon-  
Goat  had pulled down  calamity  on his own  head.  Goat-Baboon  
had begun  singing  aloud  so that  the sentries  would  wake  and 
scatter  us to the four  winds,  but  the louder  his voice  was  raised,  
the faster  we applied  our legs  to the road,  and by the time  the 
sentries  woke up, we had passed  out of sight, while he






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
remained  visible  to them.  Until we returned  home,  any child  
that we encountered  who failed  to take his medication  was  
referred  to as Goat-Baboon.
After our escape  from the sentries,  we began to 
encounter  snakes  one after  the other  but they  did not molest  
us, they  simply  minded  their  own business.  After  some  further  
walking,  we began to encounter  compounds  built by the 
snakes  themselves,  in which  they stored  toads  as livestock.  
Toads  were  their  favourite  food,  and it was with  this that  they  
entertained  their  guests.  Within  such  stockades,  I saw  with my 
own eyes  toads  as huge  as hens.  The roads  in this town  shone  
brilliantly  but they  would  have been even more  splendid  but 
for the skin that moulted  from their bodies  and littered  the 
streets.  Sometimes,  as we proceeded,  snakes  would  drop  from  
above  and land in front  of us, sometimes  they landed  on the 
shoulder  and other  times  a snake  would  wind  itself  around  our 
legs  and play  with  us.






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL  
THE  WORLD'S  REPTILES
W hen we entered  the city proper,  something  of 
note occurred.  When  a snake  began  to coil itself  
all over Ijambaforiti's  body, our companion's  
tolerance  level was breached,  especially  as the snake  began  
from  his feet  and continued  ail the way  to his shoulder.  When  it 
reached  his shoulder,  it settled  there  and refused  to budge.  
After a while, another  snake began to clamber  all over  
Ijambaforiti,  gaining  his other  shoulder,  and when  the two  saw  
each other,  they began  to frolic around  Ijambaforiti's  neck.  
When  some  time passed  and they refused  to quit their new  
playground,  Ijambaforiti  grew  furious.  He adjusted  the rope  of 
his trousers, making  it taut,  gripped  his gun and primed  it, then  
faced us as a strong  man addresses  an audience.  His throat  
swelling  with  grim laughter,  he barked,  'He who is determined  
to die . meets with him who determined  his death, I, 
Ijambaforiti,  I can tolerate  most things,  but certainly  not 
insulting  behaviour.  No one dies twice.  If death  is destined  to 
take  me away,  then  I am prepared  to accompany  death.'
With this declaration,  he seized  the two snakes  and 
flung  them  to the ground,  after  which  he picked  up a stick  and 
smashed  their  heads,  and killed  them.  Enter  Triple  Trouble!






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
The moment  Ijamba  had done  the deed,  we heard  the 
ringing  of a bell, and before  we could blink, two guards  
appeared  and attacked  us with bites  but their  bites  were  of no 
effect because  of the protection  we had swallowed  that  
morning.  When  they  found  that nothing  appeared  to affect  us, 
they  seized  us and hauled  us off-destination,  the home  of Boa-  
of-Fury,  he who  is the head  of reptiles  throughout  the  world.
Ah, God is mighty  as a kingl  When  we came  before  Boa-  
of-Fury,  the thoughts  that had once occupied  my mind  
returned  -1 could  not envisage  my survival  in this world.  From  
the day  that I had been  traipsing  through  the world,  I never  yet 
encountered  a creature  that  commanded  such  fear  as the Boa-  
of-Fury.  Boa-of-Fufy  was monstrous.  He belonged  to the group  
of belly gliders  but his head was human,  his mouth  was  
however  much  bigger  than  a man's.  A goat  did not suffice  Boa-  
of-Fury  at one sitting,  he required  two full-grown  cows  
whenever  he sat down  to eat.
When  we arrived  at the palace  of the king,  we found  him 
seated  on the throne,  in state,  his courtiers  coiled  around  him.  
Terrifying  as he was,  he was  splendid  to behold,  his entire  body  
lustrous  as when  myriads  of precious  stones  are gathered  in 
one spot. When  Boa-of-Fury  had colled  himself  into his rest  
position,  he resembled  a small  hill.
When  we were  led before  him and he’gazed  on us, his 
rage mounted,  his-head  was transformed  and seemed  even  
bigger  than  before.  His courtiers  began  to hiss in anger  towards






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
US. When  Boa-of-Fury  began  to speak,  his voice  rumbled  like 
approaching  rain,  and his eyes  were  like red beads.  He let out a 
bellow  of rage:
'Man! Man! Man! You actual!y  pursued  us here! You 
chi!dren  of men ah, ah, ah! On!y  the God of Glory  himself  can  
ever  settle  the hostility  that  lies between us. Venomous  snakes,  
enemy  of man;  non-venomous,  enemy  of man.  If a man  sees  a 
snake  in the open,  he kills it. He encounters  it in a corner,  he kills 
it; there  is no enmity  quite  like the enmity  between  snake  and 
humans  except  the enmity  between  the followers  of Satan  and 
followers  of God.
'Take  these  ones  away,  guards,  take them  to my corral.  
Select  the plumpest  of the lot, kill him and bring him to me - all 
of them  shall  serve  as my meal,  for destruction is the end of the 
murderer,  those  who kill my children,  it is only fitting  that I 
continue  to kill their children.  That day will surely  dawn  for 
those  who pursue  their  fellow  creatures  to do them  harm;  as 
long as I live, it shall not be said that I set eyes on the child of 
man  and that  child  lives  to tell the tale.'
As he ended  his threats,  he burst  into laughter  and his 
chiefs  cried with one voice,  'Kabiyesi,  owner  of the mandate,  
companion  of the gods,  the death that kills the children  of the 
strong  headed,  disciplinarian  of the unteachable.  Kabiyesi,  
Kabiyesi,  Kabiyesi.'
After  this, they led us to the backyard,  and when  we 
arrived  there,  we found  twenty-five  of our own kind,  these  had 
also lost  their  way  in the forest  and landed  in the clutches  of the






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
king  of snakes.  When  we arrived  at their  place  of confinement,  
we were confronted,  on one side, by the litter  of human  skulls  
and skeletons  numbering  over a thousand.  At the time of 
which  I speak,  all fear had evaporated  because  my mind had 
left the earth,  and I had begun  to think  of the outskirts  of 
heaven.  The  guards  lined  up those  of us who  were  newcomers,  
they  pressed  our  flesh  at the buttocks  and the chest  to see how  
much  fat we had on us. When  they came  close  to me, they  
seized  a man  who  was somewhat  fatter  than  I and,  after  briefly  
examining  him,  killed  him right  before  our  eyes.
After  a while,  they  brought  food  for us but I did not eat, 
because  when  they  wanted  to bring  in the food,  I overheard  
them  arguing  among  themselves  whether  the potion  they  had 
mixed  with  the food  would  achieve  the purpose  of fattening  us 
up or was too little.  The king's  servants  only  whispered  among  
themselves,  but I had moved  close  to the wall and could  hear  
what they  said. My companions  ate their  food but I only  ate a 
portion  of the bean  cake  that  my mother  from  the abode  of the 
dead  had given  me. By morningthe  following  day,  all those  who  
ate the food  that  was served  us had changed,  they  were  bigger  
and fatter.  Enia-se-pele  and Ewedaiyepo  who  were  not as fat as 
I, were  now  bigger.  Ijambaforiti  whose  body  was  always  muscle  
taut  had  gone  soft  and plump,  his skin  smooth  and  glossy.
When  I sawthis  alteration, I summoned  my companions  
to a corner  and shared  my observations,  and what I had 
overheard,  with them.  I also revealed  to them  that I had this






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
bean  cake  in my pouch,  that  it was  inexhaustible  no matter  how  
often  we ate it, and counseled  that it was this bean  cake we 
should  rely  on for nourishment.
The afternoon  of the following  day, the servants  of Boa-  
of-Fury  picked  up another  plump  victim  from among  us, and  
slaughtered  him for their king. They nearly picked on 
Ijambaforiti  but when  they examined  him more  thoroughly,  
they  decided  that  he was  not  sufficiently  ripe  for eating.
They  continued  to tempt  us with all kinds  of food but 
none  of us touched  them.  On the third  day, they  picked  one of 
those  who had preceded  us there,  killed him for the king's  
pleasure..
They continued  to kill us one by one and I became  
resigned  to the approach  of my own  day  of death,  but much as 
they tempted  us with dishes,  I refused  to touch  their  food>  
surviving  only on my mother's  bean cake together  with the 
survivors  among  my band,  we who had set out together  from  
the home  of the Furry-Bearded-One.  That bean cake was a 
great  help,  for it enabled us to remain  trim,  and now,  we began  
.to consider  what  could  be done.  By now,  they  had killed  many  
of us, and I began  to fear  that,  in the end,  they  would  set on the 
rest  and kill us whether  we were  sufficiently  plump  or not.
One day, I raised  my eyes  and called  upon  God,  crying,  
'0 King  of Fleavens,  do not fail to.rescue us from  this captivity.  
There  is nothing  difficult  for  you,  there  is no despair  that  settles  
.on mortals  from which  you cannot  rescue  them,  there  is no






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
predicament  in which  mortals  find themselves  from  which  you 
cannot  extricate  them.  From  misery  over  money,  from  misery  
over children,  from the wiles of enemies  within,  from the 
schemes  of enemies  without,  from misery  at the hands  of 
relations,  you Lord of Heaven  alone  are the bulwark  on which  
we lean.  Save  me, 0 Lord,  save me, save me from Boa-of-Fury,  
God, God come  to my rescue,  rescue  me from the reptilian  
guards,  save me. Lord, Lord save me, save me from this 
noonday  confinement,  save  me, come  to my rescue.'
Thus  I prayed,  little knowing  that even  as I spoke  these  
words,  one of the guards  overheard.  He was one of those  
menials  with  whom  the children  of this world  must  interact  on 
earth,  one of those  idle types,  eye-pleasers  who indulge  in 
carrying  tales in order  to earn  the favours  of their  masters,  lest 
their own secrets  become  exposed.  This guard carried  my 
words  to the Boa-of-Fury  and told him that  I had consigned  him 
to the hands  of God.
When  Boa-of-Fury  heard,  he roared  out loud and his 
voice  was like Approaching  storm.  'Who  is this King of Heaven  
that  will save  you from  my trap,  you children  of earth?  Just  who  
is this God  where I stand?  True,  the spirits  claim  that  it was  God  
who created  everything  on earth  and in heaven,  nonetheless,  
even  if that  were  indeed  true,  I also  am mighty  in my splendor,  I 
being  the chieftain  of all the crawling  creatures  upon earth.  
Tomorrow  is the day that winds  up your existence  on earth,  
when your heads  will simmer  in my soup pot. If I do not






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
slaughter  you all tomorrow,  take  it that  I am not the true  son of 
my father!'
When  I heard  these  words,  I became  truly  despondent.  
However,  while  on the one hand,  I was miserable  that  someone  
had set the day of my death,  on the other,  I was  certain  that  the 
day of reckoning  for the Boa-of-Fury  was close,  because  the 
day that any object  of creation  proclaims  that the Creator  
counts  for nothing,  that is the starting  point  for that person's  
own destruction.  I therefore  kept silent,  waiting  to see what  
God himself  would  do.
A little  while  later,  I gathered  my companions  together  
and asked  them  what  weapons  they  still had with  them.  I told  
them  point-blank  that  we had to make  a definite  move  before  
this monster  consumed  us all. I recalled  my fight  with  Anjonnu-  
iberu at the outskirts  of Igbo Olodumare,  and I resolved  to 
make a last stand of seven  wonders.  All the principal  ones  
among  us were  overjoyed.  Each  prepared  to make  an effort  and 
bestir  themselves  as became  men. But our gaolers  had also  
confiscated  our  weapons  when  we were herded  into our piace  
of confinement,  taken  them  away  to the strong  room  of Boa-  
of-Fury,  where  it was  guarded  by numerous  snakes.
Even as we gave  thought  to how  we might  recover  our 
weapons,  Enia-se-pele  informed  us that he had met an old 
acquaintance  among  the king's  messengers.  While  we were  
preparing  for death,  Enia-se-pele  had directed  his mind  to our 
liberation,  seeking  ways of penetrating  our captors'  secrets.






IN THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Boa-of-Fury  was one of those  creatures  who neglected  the 
welfare  of his menials,  and  when  we had all resolved  to boycott  
the prison  fare, Enia-se-pele  sought  to buy the friendship  of 
this servitor  by offering  him our rejected  food.  We suspected  
nothing  of this, only observing  that  whenever  our regulation  
meals  were  brought,  Enia-se-pele  took it on himself  to receive  
the trays.  We did not know  what  he did with  the food,  only  now  
did we realize  that he took it to this servant,  and thus they  
became  nearfriends.
We summoned  the servant,  and when  I had also given  
him some of my bean  cake,  urged  him to assist  us in retrieving  
our weapons  from  the strong  room.  He agreed,  but cautioned  
that  it was  only  when  the guards  signed  off at the end of the day 
could  he approach  the strong  room  and liberate  the  weapons.
At five o'clock  in the afternoon,  the guards  ended their  
watch and left the palace.  The moment  their backs were  
turned,  our new ally entered  the strong  room  and brought  us 
the weapons.  We gathered  much  of our charms  and medicines  
and handed  them  to Ewedaiyepo  for safekeeping,  for he was  
also a diviner  who  loved  to show  off. If we so much  as touched  
his charms  he would  berate  us. He threw  an alligator  pepper  in 
his mouth  whenever  he mentioned  the great progenitor,  
Or/uc/uwo,  consulted  Ifa incessantly  and sought  out  the leaves  
of the  forest.
When  we had gathered  our fighting  tools  and secured  
the important  medicines  with Ewedaiyepo,  we began to






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES s
consider  ways  of making good  our escape.  To achieve  that,  we 
had first to kill Boa-of-Fury  himself,  and this was no light  
undertaking.  When  we had mulled  over for a while  without  
finding  a solution,  Enia-se-pele  offered  a suggestion.  This  
crawling  monster,  Boa-of-Fury,  routinely  went  for his daily  bath  
in the compound,  usually  around  six in the morning.  Enia-se-  
pele's  proposal  was that  we should  find several  machetes  and 
sharpen  them  to razor  keenness.  At night,  we would  bury  the 
machetes  with the sharp  edges  facing  up. When  Boa-of-Fury  
slithered  out in the morning  for his bath  and felt a cut from  the 
first machete,  he would  instinctively  race faster,  while the 
blades would  continue  to slice his underbeliy  in ribbons,  
spilling  out his guts.  This  struck  us as good  strategy,  we thanked  
Enia-se-pele  and prepared  to follow  his advice.  At night,  we 
buried  the machetes  as planned  along  Boa-of-Fury's  route,  the 
business  ends pointing  upwards.  After  this, we packed  our 
belongings  in preparation,  each gripped  his weapons  but left 
most  of the medicines  with  Ewedaiyepo.
The following  morning,  quite  early,  Boa-of-Fury  indeed  
went  out for his bath, unaware  that the day of Edumare  had 
dawned  when  He would  prove  to him that He indeed  existed.  
When  he dragged  his mouth  along  the first  blade  and felt it bite  
into him, he raced  along,  the machetes  slicing  through  him as 
he fled. This monster  of a creature  began  to writhe,  but the 
more  he did, the more  his intestines  piled  out, reddening  the 
ground  with his blood,  and confusion  fell among  the reptiles.






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Before  Boa-of-Fury  expired,  he understood  whose  handiwork  
this was and he proclaimed  us into heaven  with horrendous  
cries: 'Human  breed!  Human  breed!  Human  breed!  On your  
account  I take  my leave'.
That  was how,  on the day he spoke  blasphemous  words  
again  the King of Heaven,  the intestines  spilled  out, the liver  
emerged,  and his stomach  was exposed  to the elements.  May  
God not let such  occur  within  our purlieu.
We understood  however  that whoever  killed the 
chieftain  of reptiles  had tugged  affliction  by the foot,  the eyes  
of whoever  did what  we had done  would  stare  the unexpected  
in the face.  By the time  the cry of this  singular  being  rent  the air, 
we had already  pulled  tight our trouser  cords.  When  we had 
retrieved  our machetes  and guns  however  and sought  to check  
on the fortification  medicines  we had left in Ewedaiyepo's  
safekeeping,  he was nowhere  to be found,  Ewedaiyepo  had 
fled, taken to his heels. Who would  have known  that the 
moment  Boa-of-Fury  let out his cry, Ewedaiyepo  had raced  up 
the rafters  out of sight?  It was while  we searched  for him 
everywhere  that someone  came to whisper  to us that  
Ewedaiyepo  was not in the room  but had taken  refuge  in the 
rafters.  This  led me to investigate  the truth  or falsity  of this,  and 
when  I looked  within  that space,  who  would  I find indeed  but 
Ewedaiyepo  perched  gingerly  within. I collected  all our 
pouches  of fortifications  and charms,  piled our hunting  
pouches  on his head and set out, hissing  in disgust,  while  he






I
THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
followed  shamefacedly.
That' is how we find many in this world who call 
themselves  diviners  and healers,  but who lack the courage  to 
summon  the forces  they  hoard,  they  permit  fear  to'turn  them  
into pathetic  beings.  One who boasts  mystic  powers  but lacks  
cofurage  is less powerful  than one who has courage  but is 
devoid  of mystic  powers.  We made  fun of Ewedaiyepo  over  this  
conduct,  indeed  the matter  did not dry in our mouths until  we 
had departed  the town of snakes  and were restored  to our 
homes.  When  Olohun-duru  stood  up, he would  face us and  
declaim:  'Good  friends  of mine,  when  Boa-of-Fury  roared  out 
loud,  what  did Ewedaiyepo  do?' Arid we would  all chorus,  'He 
vanished  into the rafters'.  That would rile Ewedaiyepo  
immensely  and he would  appeal  to me, whining,  'I don't  like 
this, Olowo-aiye,  1 don't  like this at all.' Other  times,  he would  
turn tp Enia-se-pele,  'Man  of gentle  ways,  ways'  gentility  is in 
your  hands.'  This  was  how  he would  react  whenever  we were  in 
a light-hearted  mood;  he provided  the butt  of our  jokes.
When we had retrieved  all our fortifications  and 
charms,  we prepared  for the engagement  and the snakes  
engagedps  in the great  grandfather  of all battles,  ijambaforiti  
was  the first  to complete  his preparations.  The moment  he was  
done,  he strode  out and shouted:  'Whoever  wants  to come  
out, let him come  out. Ijambaforiti  is battle  ready.  Ijambaforiti  
sets  out  on his way.'
What other  could  have  beep  the response?  Hundreds






TTf. IN THE FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
I
I
1
i
I I
t
' i
(I
ji
!■of snakes  that  were  in the surrounds  of the palace  knew  at once  
that it was we who  had killed  their  king.  Before  we could  bat an 
eyelid,  Ijambaforiti  was already,  striding  out tp meet them,  
followed  by a number  from  our band. Enia-se-pele,  Olohun-  
duru and I were inside  the palace  with the rest, preparing  
ourselves.  With the death  of the king, the retinue,  servants,  
nobles,  wives  and children  living  in the palace  had fled.
When  we were ready  and were about  to come out,  
armed with machetes  and guns, we found our people  
embroiled  in a .raging  war. Snakes  had wrapped  themselves  
around  Ijambaforiti  to the extent  that we could  no longer  see 
his body  under  them.  But even  as we looked down  and ?aw  the 
corpses  of snakes  carpeting  the ground  beyond  view,  we knew  
that  the ones  who  still remained  numbered  far higher  than  the 
ones  that had perished.  We all had taken  our daily  dose  of the 
anti-venom  portion  provided  us by the Furry-Bearded-bne,  for 
this reason,  the snakes'  poison  did not tweak  one hair on ouf 
body, but it was not all those  who emerged  from the paibce  
confinement  who were so protected,  because'  when it was  
time  to dose,  we could  not  find six of us, and when  the fight  was  
at its height,  five of them  perished.  The sixth,  who  was junior  
brother  to Goat-Baboon,  died on the way after  we had left the 
town.
This battle  went  beyond  what  the tongue  can narrate,  
but in the end, we gave thanks  to God that we triumphed.  
When  we began  to tire, Enia-se-pele  who had stuck  to a diet  
without  oil and without  salt gathered  a lot of sand. He poured
1






THE  BOA-OF-FURY.  KING OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
them  among  the grass  as he walked,  then he took  some  water  
from  the  jar given us by the Furry-Bearded-One  and sprinkled  it 
over  the sand,  saying,  'I order  yo.u in the name  of the Owner  of 
the Skies,  the King  of Heaven,  the Keeper  of Life,  the Holy  Spirit,  
King  of Glory, the Mender  of Wrongs, the Pillar  of Support,  the 
Being  of Wonders,  the Creator  of Mankind,  The Creator  of the 
Word,  the Creator  of Heaven,  Creator  of all that  we see.  Creator  
of all that remain  invisible,  you who bore  the insolence  of the 
Boa-of-Fury,  but whom  the rest of humanity  honour,  today,  in 
the midst  of travail,  I command  that  these  grains  of sand  turn  
into  venomous  soldier  ants  and begin  to sting  these  snakes.'  On 
the utterance  of-these  words,  the grains  of sand truly  turned  
into  the red-hot  ants  and began  to sting  the snakes.
As furiously  as they attacked  the snakes,  so did the 
snakes  attempt  to retaliate.  In so doing  however,  they  merely  
sank  their  fangs  into their  own bodies  and their  companions,  
thereby  beginning  to kill one another,  and this continued  until
V we overcame  them.  With this victory,  we returned  to the 
I palace,  brought  out  the store  of food  and began  to feast.  Before  
that  however, Enia-se-pele  and I went  to examine  the corpse  of 
! Boa-of-Fury  where he had expired.  When  we looked  within  his 
intestines,  we saw twogourdlets,  one was gold and the other  
silver.  When  I broke  open mine,  which  was  golden,  a cascade  of 
; gold  coins  ensued.  Enia-se-pele  had picked  the silver  and when  
he had broken  his and tipped  it, it was silver  coins  that poured  
out.  These  coins  have  continued  to pour  out  without  cessation.
mm






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
can never  dry up, and thus  itwas  that  I became  a rich man,  nor 
can anyone  dislodge  the gourdlet  from  my keep.
We feasted  sumptuously  in the palace  of the Boa-of-  
Fury and drank lots of spirits as well. Ijambaforiti  was  
thoroughly  drunk.  When  night  fell, we packed  our  belongings,  
loaded  them  on the heads  of the  junior  ones  among  us-for  we 
were  now more  numerous than when  we had departed  from  
the home  of the Furry-Bearded-One,  those  whom  we had met  
in captivity  at the Boa-of-Fury's  palace  having  also  Joined  us.
Ijambaforiti  led the way and we followed.  It was with  
song  and dance  that we took-our  leave, processing  through  
the town. And it was Ijambaforiti  who led the singing,  himself  
as the main  theme  of the songs.  He told us to chant  'Ijamba'-  
while  he concluded  with 'foriti'.  As he swung  into stride  so did 
we all fall in step, following  him and clapping  to the beat...  
IJamba  -Foriti-IJamba-Foriti-IJamba-Foriti-iJamba  and so on 
I and on. This  was  the mood  in which  we left the town  of snakes
I ' where  Boa-of-Fury  had ruled  as king.
i It did not take too long -after  we left the town that
darkness  fell, and we slept by'the  roadside  till dawn.  Until  
nightfall  we did not come to another  town, but by the 
afternoon  of the third  day,  we arrived  at the place  of the seven  
women,  who kept running  around  till eternity.  In the 
beginning,  at the very  beginning  of the  world,  at the  time  when  
Satan  stumbled  and crashed  on the outskirts of heaven,  when  
God placed  a division  between  the virtuous  heaven  and the






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING,  OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
sinful,  there  existed  a tree on. the rim,of  a bottotriless  pit that  
separated  the two heavens.  The dwellers  of heaven  knew  this 
tree  by the name  Mine-Alone,  This  tree  sprouted  various  fruits,  
and the fruits  were exceedingly,  beautiful,  but no one ever  
touched  them, for anyone  that did would encounter  
turbulence,  whoever  plucked  their  fruits  would  taste  the.anger  
of God. However,  these  delinquent women  behaved  in a way  
that was displeasing  to God. They  abandoned  their  stations  
where  they  had been  placed  by God in the outskirts  of heaven,  
went  and plucked  the fruits  of Mine-alone,  plucked  them  and 
came into the world to distribute  them among  the earth  
dwellers  for eating. Since then the people  of earth have  
behaved  in a shameful  manner  towards  one another,  where  
one could not bear the progress  of another  like his own,  
denigrating  one another  all over  the world.  However,  the sinful  
will not fail to undergo  chastisement,  unless  the sinnerquickly  
repents.  Because  these  seven  women  proved  unrepentant,  the 
King  of Heaven  reviled  them,  and said in his anger:
,'You obdurate  beings,  I created  you and you forgot  me, 
you went  and made  my people  taste  the fruits  of Mine-alone,  
and you turned  their lives into the bitter  leaf. Gp, you rpu^t  
never  return  to heaven,  go into yonder  forest,.  ru,n aimlessly  
around  for the rest  of your  days,  thatjyou.mgy  serve,a§p  le^soh  
for the incprrigible,  and understanding  for-the  deaf, nqr yvill 
you find relief  from the condition  pf misery  in wjiich  ypu are 
now  cast,  until  the day  of reversal  for all things.'






21f»l| IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
Thus  did the King  of Heaven  curse  these  seven  women,  
since  they  counted  their  Creator  as nothing.  Before  we left the 
Furry-Bearded-One;  he had spoken  much  about  these  women,  
and had enjoined  us to block our ears with cotton  as we 
approached  them,  refrain  from  looking on the left side where  
they  ran in endless circles  singing  their  seductive  songs  which  
filled the listener  with  a desite  to look,  yet  whoever  set eyes  on 
them  would  never  depart  from  there.  The  f urry-Bearded-One  
had further  specified  that  when  we reached  a valley  that  was  
irhpenetrably  dark,  where  no sound  was heard  from a single  
bird, where  no lizards  were  seen  frolicking,  where  no squirrel  
scampered  up a tree,  where  we encountered  no spoor  of an 
animal,  we would  know  that we were  close  by the abode  of 
these  ill-fated  women.  We were  then to stuff our ears with  
cloth  until we arrived  at a plain.  He prepared  us alsd for the 
sensation  where,  on arriving  at the very place, we would  
experience  fear and the hairs  on our body  would  rise. When  
you have sensed  these  signs,  prepare  to flee. Sure enough,  
when  we approached,  we began  to see these  signs.  Instantly  
we stuffed  our ears  with  cloth  and continued  on our way.  This  
was  how  we traversed  the deep  valley.
Alas, when we had crossed  over and checked  our 
numbers,  one of our band,  whose name  was Ibanuje-isale  was  
missing.  He was the one whose  visage  was permanently  off- 
putting,  whose  mouth  was constantly  pursed  in a snarl.  We 
waited  ahead  but he did not appear,  yet no one actually  saw






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE  WORLD'S  REPTILES
how  he behaved  in the valley.  We blew  our whistles  but there  
was no reply,  we shouted  but, till today,  no one has seen  him.  
Some  testified that  when  we^arrived  at the place  of the Seven  
Women,  the man looked  in their direction  and turned  off 
towards  them,  others  claimed  that  he had separated  before  we 
arrived  there,  and that he must have got lost In the forest.  
However,  everyone  merely  said what  he wished  and one^did  
not know  what  to believe;  what  we do know  for certain  is that  
we departed  the palace  of Boa-of-Fury  with  Ibanuje-isal^,  and  
left  the valley  ofthe  Accursed  Women  without  him.
We had left this valley  when  we met a ghommid  on an 
errand from  the Furry-Bearded-One,  he had only  one eye. We 
exchange(;l  very  warm  greetings  at the reunion  for, by this  time,  
we felt no fear of ghommids.  We constantly  ran into one  
another,  parted  from,  one another,  chatted  with one another,  
clowned  with one another,  cooked  bean pottage  for one  
another,  indeed,  it only lacked  little for us ourselves  to be 
accounted  ghommids.
The one-eyed  ghommid  gave  me a letter  written  to me 
by the Furry-Bearded-One,  and the contents  ofthe  letter  were  
as follows:
Residence  ofthe  Furry-Bearded-One  
Who  lives  on the Rock  Promontor  
Care  ofthe  one-eyed  Ghommid  
Half-way  Outpost  of Heaven  and earth  
Eighth  Day  ofthe  Sixth  Month  
A thousand  and  forty-fourth  Year






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
After  the death  of our Lord  
To: The  Worthy  Olowo-aiye,  son of  Akowediran
My dear  0/oM/o-o/ye,
Since  you left me, I have  not ceased  to feel your  absence,  and I 
entertain  hopes  that, by the tirrie this letter  catches  up with  
you, you would  have  left the town  of serpents  and also passed  
by the accursed  women.
Without  a doubt, you would have encountered  
countless  hazards,  but I hope  that you would  not forget  the 
counsel  I constantly  gave  you when  you were  with me, that, in 
order  to triumph  over  the world,  there  are seven  things  that  
you must  undertake:  One,  you must  rely  on the King  of Heaven  
and make  Him the charm  whose  invocation  is on your lips as 
you wake. Two, you must always  deal with people  in full 
sincerity,  we must  never  find you in the service  of deception  
where  you say one  thing  to the other  while  carrying  around  the 
calabash  of conspiracy.  Three,  you must  humble  yourself,  the 
sin of arrogance  is what angers  God most among  all the 
misconduct  of humanity  on earth;  when  the son of God came  
to the outskirts  of the world  long ago, he came  with humility.  
He was conceived  in a lowly  village,'and  born in a stable,  he 
admonished the proud  and he bathed  the feet of his disciples.  
Four, be diligent,  do not play with your work, progress  will






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF ALL THE WORLD ’S REPTILES
always elude  the idle,  whoever  spends  all his days  sleeping.will  
never  find a place  among  people  of substance.  Five,  be patient  
with people  of the world,.for  if you fail in this,  you will become  
an idiot  like they.  Sixth,  never  expect  in all your  life that if you 
extend  goodness  to the children  of the world,.you  will receive  
their  thanks.  Only few of humanity  recognizes  kindness.  He 
who  extends  his generosity  gladdens  the heart  of Oiodumare,  
this is why  others  have  not  abandoned doing  good  from  anger,  
and in any  case,  no one can ever  predict  from  where  his reward  
will come,  the person  whom  you thought  would  appreciate  
benevolence  would  not, while  those  from  whom  it was least  
expected  would, and spread  the news  of your  deed  all oVer  the 
world. Seven,  do not concern  yourself  only  with  what  concerns  
you, you are not alone  in the world,  always  lend a hand  to the 
next  person.
My dear  Olowo-aiye,  I thank  you for the little  time  that  
we spent  together,  and I thank  you'for  the money  you gave to 
my household  at your  departure.
I leave  you under  the protection  of the King  of Heaven  
May  Edumare  be your  pillar  of support.
My entire  household  sends  you  greetings.
Your  very  good  friend.
The Furry-Bearded-One.
Thus  went  Furry  Beard's  letter  to me, and as I read the 
letter,  it was  as if he was  standing  before  me, a most  impressive






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
man is Furry  Beard.  A friend  on whom  one can rely, not one  
whose  eyes look  sweet  as honey,  but whose  thoughts  are like 
the venom  of a viper, the friend  who  keeps  home  for us in our 
absence, greets  us fifty  time?  every  day but is chairman  at the 
fount  of plots  against  one.
I also  prepared  a reply  for myfriend:
On the Road
Igbo  Olodumare
The  tenth  day  of the  sixth month
Nineteen  Hundred  and  forty-four
After  the death  of our Lord
To:
The  Worthy  Furry-Bearded-One
Who  Lives  on the Rock  Promontory
Care  of the One-eyed  Ghorhmid,  near  the Home  of Death
Half-way  Outpost  between  Heaven  and Earth
My dear  Furry-Bearded-One,.
I
It was  on my  journeying  feet  that  your  letter  came  to hand.  Just  
when  your  thoughts  assailed  me was exactly  when  I lay hands  
on it. When  I read  it, it seemed  to me that  I could  see  you clearly  
before  me. Since  the day  of my departure,  not a day  had passed  
when  I did not remember  you.  Your  absence  is a great  source  of 
sadness  to me, and  very  often  you even  appear  in my dreams.






THE BOA-OF-FURY,  KING OF ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
Before  I continue  with my letter,  i must  first thank  you 
for your  care and hospitalityduring my sojourn  with  you. Only  
the King of Heaven  can repay  the care you lavished  on me. 
What  did my lips not savour  in your house?  Pounded  yam or 
oka, or is it maize?  A dog does  not forget  its benefactor,  I can 
never  forget  you,  you are indeed  a man  among  men.  Ah, Furry-  
Bearded-One,  I thank  you. Even as the Moslem  remembers.  
Allah, as the Christian  remembers  God, even so will I 
rememberyou  forever.
I thankyoualsoforthevarious  counsel  you offered  me, I 
have not forgotten,  notm  the least,  it is all folded  within  my left 
palm  whith  is tjie hand  with which  I do not eat. I want you to 
know  that these  counsel  are priceless,  some are like silver,  
others  like gold,  yet others  like diamonds  which  are stones  of 
immense  vaiue.  if one had to pay money  for advice,  some  
would  cost at least a thousand  pounds.  Therefore  whoever  
offers  one important  advice  bestows  on one an invaluable  gift.  
May Heaven  not piace  us in the company  of enemies,  for the 
counsel  of enemies  is like a seventeen-day  old stew,'while  the 
guidance  of friends  is sweeter  than  honey  itself,  this is why.  the 
\^l-bred  should  reflect  deeply  before  he follows  the counsel  
of others  or kicks it of in rejection.  You are a friend,  Furry-  
Bearded-One,  and your  counsel  has entered  into the recesses  
of my head.
I also have  some advice  to offer  you,  for what  concerns  
you concerns  me. 1 observed  while  1 was with you that your






IN THE  FORBST  OF OLODUMARE
heart  is whiter  than  cotton  fluff, but I have  to let you know  that 
the heart  of the people  of the world  are not thus.  You need  to 
take good heed, for I entertain  great- fear -of some of your  
■neighbours.  Whoever  makes  his habitation  next  to th^ home  of 
Death  has chosen  to live next to something-sinister,  .whoever  
lives next  to Disease  has chosen  Trouble  as neighbour,  even  as 
one who hears  the crowing  of heaven's cockerel  needs to take 
exceeding  care. The enemy  lives in one's  backyard,  it is in the 
home  that one's  undoer  lives. If the death  from within  cannot  
kill-us,  the external  is powerless,  our house  help knows  our 
secrets,  it is one's  wife that knows  one's  sleeping  mat. On this 
account,  may Edumarre  save us from  the enemy  within  and the 
enemy  without
. Excessive  talking only leads to lies, therefore  my 
message  will not be too long.v
Greetings  to all your  family. - •
We are all well on our part.
May  Heaven  riot refuse  our reunion.
If the Keeper  of Breath  does  not recover  his property.
The day  comes  when.we  shall  again  set eyes  on each  other.
I remain  your  friend  from  one eye to the other,
Olowo-aiye,  Son of  Akowediran.
Thus  went  my letter  and I entrusted  it to the one-eyed






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF  ALL THE WORLD'S  REPTILES
ghommid  for delivery  to my friend.
I cannot  narrate  all the things  that befell me before  I 
returned to the spot  where  ! first  missed  my way in the Forest  
of Olodumare  on.setting  out from my home  - that is;.where  I 
left my wife before  finding  myself  perched  precariously  on a 
treetop  for quite  some  time. If I embarked  on that part of the 
story to tell what  .my eyes endured,  this would require,  yet 
another  book  on its own. But what.I  shall.reveal  is that it took  
six months  after the receipt  of the letter  from Furry-Beard  
before  I regained  the residence  of the King  of Igbo  Olodumare.  
We encountered  numerous  small towns,  and the rewards  I 
gained  were indeed  plentiful'.  I had accumulated  riches  upon  
riches;  to,the  extent  that ! had to engage  porters  to assist  in 
carrying  them.  In the end however,  I arrived  at the place  of the 
King of Igbo  Olodumare.,And  when  the king  dndJ  stood.face  to 
face staring  at each other-joy  met  Joy, laughter  took  laughter  
to wife, dance toyed with* dance> food surmounted  food,  
humans  and ghommids  walked  around  with  their  arms  around  
one .another's  neck, there was tremendous  jubilation  
throughout  the forestof  Olodumare.
When  the ghommid  and I had exhausted  greetings,  and 
I enquired after  my wife,  hd told me that my elder  relation  had 
visited,  and that he had taken  my wife back  to our home  when  
no further  news  had been received  about  me. He told me also






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
that she had given  birth,  and that  the child was named  Akara-  
ogun.
■' We stayed  three days in the palace  of this king, then  
came  time  to let him know  that I wished  to return home  so as.to  
see my wife.and  my new child,  and he agreed.  But for the wife 
who was awaiting me, he would  not have let me go, for he still 
offered  that fremain  and live with him. The king  was extremely  
hospitable,  caused  me no suffering  of any kind, he took  care of 
me to the limit. He was not like one of those  who, when  God 
has finally  placed  them  in a high position,  look down on others  
with the eye of belittlement,  thinking  that it is for them  alone  
that the world was made. They forget that the young  
rememberwheretheelderstumbledandfell.  Hewhostepson  
the tale of a viper  will endure  the wrath  bfa snake,  whoever  
stands  *on the downward  slope of an approaching  vehicle  is 
playing  with death,  he who enters  his prime  yet lacks  the inner  
fiberoftheelderisnothingbutachild.  . >
- And so I left the palace  of the king,and  returned  to my 
town.  My heart rejbiced  when  I met my people,  my wife was 
overjoyed,  we reveled  in ourselves  till evening,  and we ate 
delicious  food,  and I did bring  home  the feathers  of the bush “ 
fowl as she had requested  when  I left her at the rest.place  in ^ 
Igbo Olodumare  and departed on the hunt.  My son had begun  
to walk  fully  before  I returned,  Akara-ogun,  I could  not describe  
the depths  of my rapturewhen,  at long  last, we were  united.
That is the story of my life. What  I have set down  will






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF  AU THE  WORLD'S  REPTILES
reveal  to my children  in the coming  tomorrows  the nature  of 
events  to which  my eyes were-subjected  before  I got married,  
and afterwards,  before  those  eyes could  boastof  knowing  my 
own  son, who  is my first-born.
Thus did my friend's  father  conclude  one part  of his life story.  It 
took  two days for me to transcribe  this part, I wrote  until my 
shoulder  ached  to crack,  Akara-ogun  the son of Olowo-aiye  
being  the one who read out the transcript  for me. When  we 
were  done,  he said  to me:
'My friend,  whatever  work  you are sent to perform  by 
the Almighty,  do it for the children  of the world.  If others  read 
this book and learn from it, it means  that your sojourn  in the 
world  has benefited  your  fellow  beings.  I implore  you, humility  
is the most important  part of character,  do not follow  the 
conduct  of others;  when  they have used a god-given  talent,  
they don the gown  of arrogance  as- if they are the only ones  
upon the earth. There is no one but the Lord of Heaven. 
Remember  that He who created  the soil of the earth, who 
created  water,  who created  the wind,  who created  trees,  such 
a Being  can use another  for the redemption  of the children  of 
earth.  Give thanks  to the King of Glory  if you are accounted  fit 
to assist  others,  my good friend.  I thank  you greatly  for the 
work  you have  done  for me from  the day  that I sought  you out,  
and I observed  also that you have not considered  it a big deal,  
on the contrary,  it has merely  enabled  you to acquire  greater






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
humility.  God knows  what He is doing.  He will never  cast His 
gold before  a dog, nor would  He place  precious  stones  before  
swine;  whoever  knows  how  to use His advantages  is the one to 
whom  God  gives  such  advantages.
'May  God give you a long life, may  God grant  you peace  
of mind.  May  God not fail to make  you a gift of good  health.  It is 
time  I returned  to my home,  if God preserves  our lives,  the day 
is not far when  we shall  see each  other  again.'
These  were  the man's  last words.  He fell silent  and I did 
not see him again.
This then is the substance,  my good  people.  I hope  that 
since  you began  to read these  words,  you did not fail to extract  
some  wisdom  from  them  by yourselves.  Our  elders  say that  the 
wisdom  of others  makes  it impossible  for us to call an elder  a 
lunatic.  Anyone  who  is on this earth  and lacks  wisdom  is like a 
lost animal.  My mother  used to say this to her children,  from  
our infancy  into adulthood,  she would  say that a parent  whose  
child  fails  to Imbibe  knowledge  is merely  trading  in loss.
Do not forget  that enjoyable  as the world  is, even  so is it 
full of difficulties.  There  are times  when, pn being  faced  with a 
single  problem,  it would  appear  preferable  that  one  should  die 
immediately.  When  you meet  with difficulties  on this earth,  I 
want  you to burst  intoJaughter,  know  that thp day.  will surely  
come  when  pleasure  will enter  the.j^pme  of its.own,wilh  The 
school.pupil  who fails  today's  tests,  if he applles.h|mself,  will 
soon excel, and happiness  will smother  despair  altogether.  I






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING OF ALL THE WOFlD'S  REPTILES
want  all people  to place it in their minds  that there  is no one 
who does not have his own Forest  of Olodumare  awaiting  him 
on earth,  Igbo  Olodumare  of one person  differ^from  the next-  
may  God grant  that  the Forest  of each  and everyone  be without  
injurious  effects.  Trials  that are beyond  our strength  - may  God 
not place  them  against  our chests.
Do not forget  the words  I have spoken  on the subject  of 
humility.  Pride is taking  root on earth every  day, yet pride  is the 
root of destruction.  No matter  what position  you occupy  on 
earth,  wear humility  like a smock.  The most powerful  king is 
lower  than the servant ’of the King of Heaven.  Do not forget  to 
deal with others  in sincerity,  let your  Yes be Yes, and your No, 
No. Truth is not a lightweight  virtue, if we do not itiake  
ourselves  sturdy,'to liYe by truth  becomes  difficult.  Sometimes  
when you have extricated  someone  from a ditch, he 
endeavours  to push you into a pit, but if you persist  in truth;  he 
will find himself  in that very pit into which he attempted  to 
push  you, his body  fully  jammed  within  it. Once  you deal from  
within sincerity,  Olodumare  will stay by you like a huge  
mountain,  anyone  who collides  with you is the one that will 
suffer  pain.  Take good  care of your  work,  where  you earn your  
daily  morsel  is not to be trifled  with.
It is contrary  to the plan of Olodumare  and it is 
loathsome  in the eyes of humanity  that the child we have 
brought  to earth  should  behave  in an insolent  manner  towards  
us. Therefore,  there is no form of conduct  that school  pupils






IN THE  FOREST  OF OLODUMARE
can engage  in that is more pleasing  than to show humility  
before  elders,  respect  for parents,  and self-abasement  before  
God. I admonish  the young  that if you find that you have 
behaved in a way  that  angered  your  parents,  that  alarmed  your  
teacher  and dismayed  your relations,  resolve  to discard  such 
behaviour  because  of the thought  of tomorrow.  Was it not one 
of our titled  predecessors  who set it down  in a book  that the 
child who acts-insolently  towards  his parents  will end up with 
his eyes in the beak of a vulture?  May the Almighty  save the 
school  pupil  from  such  a fate.
• Childrerr  of earth,  the world  turns,  everyday  takes  one 
day away from-the  apportioned  days of everyone,  yet our 
mortal  days were ever  only  a few. The time  that we have upon  
the earth,  let us not fail to use it productively,  let us employ it
with joy, let us use'it with laughter,  and smother  despair  with 
joyfulness.
Thus  ends  this narrative.  I greet  you ail for the past.  May 
Olodumare  take care of your homes  and take care of your  
paths.  Those  who seek money,  may Edumare  provide  them  
money  that benefits  them.  Those who seek  children,  may God 
grant  them  children  that bring  peace of mind.  Those  who seek  
employment,  may  the Master  of Glory  find them  work  that  will 
bring  them  good.  May the King of the Fount  of Giving  aid the 
mother  in the child's  upbringing,  give the wife-seeker  a wife 
that brings  well-being;  to the woman  who chooses  to avoid  
marriage  and the man who prefers the single life, may






THE  BOA-OF-FURY,  KING  OF  ALL THE  WORLD'S  REPTILES
Olodumare  bless their existence  on earth. Let him bring  
harmony  into the midst of co-wives,  provide  farmers  with 
fecund  soil, blissful  work to those who engage  in other  forms  
of labour,  give health  to the sick, bestow  wisdom  on kings,  
understanding  to nobles,  knowledge  to school  children,  may 
He take  care  of their  teachers,  and guide  the powerful  onto  the 
path  of truthfulness.
Good-bye  for now.
D.O. Fagunwa





