


IREKEONIBUDO


Chapter  1
Encounter  with  Mysterious  Creatures
My friends.
It’s quite a long time since we saw one another;  let us 
involve  ourselves  in some dialogues.  I have something  to tell 
you; for I recall  today  what  happened  to me in those  days as if 
they occurred  yesterday.  I remember  the days when  I was very  
young,  that I was following  my father  to our farm  - our remote  
farm. My father  enrolled  me in the school  when I was young  
but whenever  we were on holiday,  I would  go to the farm. The 
period  was very remarkable  in my life because  it was full of 
enjoyment.
The story  I would  tell you  today  is about  a man  I came  across  
during  the period  - the season  of enjoyment  in our farmstead.  
We would  throw  a lot of fresh maize  cobs into the fire stand  
and start dispossessing-  the cobs of their grains.  If we ate fresh  
maize  in the afternoon,  we would  consume  pounded  yam in the  
evening.  The heavy  wrapped  pounded  yam with  plantain  leaves  
usually  makes  our stomach  look like a sack of palm kernel.  I 
also remember  vividly  that our trap caught  various  animals.  We 
came across  snails,  and mushrooms  grew sporadically  on the 
farms.
A big river  was flowing  beside  my father ’s farm; I always  
fish in it. I had no net but I made  use of line and  hook.  Whenever  
I made  a journey  to the river  with my line and hook,  I would  be. 
as happy  as if I was in paradise.

IREKE  ONIBUDO0


My father  helped  me a lot because  he knew  my weaknesses.  
Whenever  we went to the farm in the morning  and I got hold  
of my hoe weeding,  he would  be observing  me. If I started  
resting,  standing  and placing  my arms on my waist  as a result  
of pain, he would  tell me to go and stay under  the shady  tree ' 
and rest. Whenever  the sun was manifesting  its hostility  and the  
noon  was fast approaching,  he would  tell me to go to our hut. 
Freedom  would  be given  to me in the evening  to go on a fishing  
expedition.
God made  farmers  kings  on their  farms.  Most  of the things  
that are valued  by people  living in the town are valueless  to 
them.  Firewood  is of no importance  to them;  leaves  are without  
honour;  foodstuffs  are too much.  A man ignorant  of the power  
of God should  go and observe  the various  unique  things  on the 
farm. There  are tall trees as well as short ones; there are big 
birds,  as well as small ones. Snakes  are running  around  while  
snails  are quietly  gliding  about;  spiders  are making  webs  while  
termites  are creating  mounds.
Some birds live in trees; some inhabit  burrowed  holes;  
while  others  reside  in nests.  Bats swing  their  heads  downward  to 
sleep;  owls  hoot-about  in the night;  doves  announce  the different  
times  of the day to the farmers  as the natural  clock  of the forest.  
The farmers  wash  down  their  meals  with cold  water.
Doubtlessly,  you would  know  the proverb  of the elders  that 
“How  many  are countable  among  the teeth  of ‘Adepele’; within  
is hundred,  without  is hundred  and sixty; yet, four hundred  
and forty  premolars  are buried  within. ” I think  I have now said 
enough  about  the farmers.  I should  continue  with  the story.
It happened  that  when  we had  midyear  holidays,  I dressed  up 
and went  to the farm in the company  of my immediate  younger
sister,  Mary.  As we were  going,  we got to the bank  of a big river  
that  was on the way to our farm.  We observed  that it was too full 
because  it was a rainy  season.  0n seeing  this, I told my younger  
sister  to return  home  while  1 entered  the river  and swam  across.  
After  some  trekking, saw a short  man  whose  height  terminated at my waist  
despite  my short  height  at that time. He was going  
at my front  while  I was behind.  He later stopped  and I also did 
because  I was frightened.  J had never  seen a man as short  as that 
before.  No other  person  except  the two of us was in the vicinity.
I waited  quietly  in anticipation  of his reaction.
I later lost sight of the man. I then continued  my journey.  * 
After  walking  for a moment,  I looked  back and saw the man 
behind  me. That was the moment  I discovered  that he had 
only one eye. The eye was on his forehead.  It resembled  the 
pocketable  mirror  that  ladies  put in their handbags.  I tried to 
talk but my tongue  failed  me; I became  dumb.  I then  took  to my  
heels.  On looking  back,  I saw seven  dwarfs  pursuing  me. They  
quickly  caught  up with  me despite  the high  velocity  of my speed  
and started  dragging  me into the bush.
After  they  had dragged  me in the bush  for about  five  minutes,
I lost their  sight.  In their  stead  was a man  that stood  before  me. I 
also saw a man  in rags  by my right-hand  side. The one before  me 
was so handsome;  I never  saw anyone  as attractive.  He wore  an 
immaculate  white  cloth;  he put on a golden cap  and wore  a pair 
of golden'  shoes;  his face was as smooth  as a mirror;  his teeth  
were as Mite  as the face of the sun; his body  was like a young  
sprouting  plant  on the river  bank  manifesting  the glory  of God.  
The white  cloth  worn  by him reached  both  his ankles and wrists.  
He looked  unrivalled  because  he did not look like an ordinary  
human  being.

IREKE  ONIBUDO


He smiled  on seeing  me and touched  my head  with  his staff; 
As he did that, I regained  my confidence  and became  relieved  
of my fright.  He said, “You young  child,  I congratulate  you on  
the plan God has in His heart  to use you for the development  of 
human  beings.  Truly,  you are a young  child  but  is the egg that 
transforms  into a cock.  The youthful  stage  of a man reflects  his 
future.  The root is the most important  part of a tree. A river ’s 
source  is its coordinator.  Start  building  your house  on the rock  
now because  God is the rock;  all other  things  are sand.  Put your  
life in the hands  of God.  You should  not forget  that  human beings  
are dangerous  because  they disrespect  truth and feed on deceit  
like pieces  of meat.  Your creator  wants  you to be speaking  the 
truth.  Though,  people  love  liars  but the love  is for a while.  People  
also create downfall  for liars. A truthful  man does not come  
across  honour  easily  and quickly  but when  he gets hold of it, he 
sits down  like a king, stands  confidently  and walks  about  like a 
brave  and powerful  man. Why?  Because  he did not accompany  
other men in covertly  acts. He never partook  in treachery;  he 
apportioned  blames  to guilty  men;,  he judged  a righteous  man 
accordingly  because  he received  bribe  from  nobody.  He did not 
involve  himself  in a partial  judgment.  However  strong  the rope  
of deceit  is, a righteous  man cuts  it with a worn-out  knife,
“Perseverance  is very  important.  Observe  your  surrounding  
trees. They are different  from ’ one. another;  they are taller  than 
one another.  You should  observe  also that those dwarfs  that 
brought  you to me are shorter  than me. Look  at this man qt your  
right-hand  side and you would  see that his rags-are  different  
from  the gorgeous  attire on me. Creatures  of the world  are not 
similar.  In the same  way, the lives of men are different.  A man 
can inherit  the world  through  perseverance.  One who  perseveres  
would  always  be where  courageous  men stand,  but a coward
IREKE  ONIBUDO

would  be in-the  midst  of commoners.  Forever,  you should  also 
cherish-respecting  elders.  Please,  I beg you passionately,-  pride  
is a stain. Do not let it splash  on you. Any man it splashes  on 
is condemned.  The sin 6f pride is like a notorious  stumbling  
block  put on a man ’s way by the devil.  I am telling  you with all 
sincerity  that the devil  will eventually  be destroyed.
“Oh  the Day  of Judgement,  the devil  would  be in interminable  
sorrow  but a righteous  man ’s life would  have  been  spoilt  before  
the land consumes  the wicked.  So, do not allow the devil to 
splash  the stain of pride on you. But gentleness  is different  
from foolishness.  Your gentleness  .should  not be accompanied  
with foolishness.  A leader  should  not be doing  what  a servant  is 
supposed  to do for him to be regarded  as being  gentle.  Likewise,  
a man should  not in the name of gentleness  turn himself  to a 
dung hill used by men. A man that is skeptical  about  his 
ability to do one thing  or the other  should rely on divine strength  
and talent;  pride should  be repudiated.  Skepticism  is an arch 
antagonist  of man. Disallow  it from  conquering  you.
“You child,  observe  the person  standing  at your  right-hand
side. Look  at him very well because  I will send him to you in 
 the future  time when you would  have grown  from  childhood  to 
adulthood.  He will come  to you to tell you his life history.  Face  
your studies  squarely  in order  to prepare  for the coming  days.  
For, a time will come  when  your father will close  his eyes and 
refuse  to open  them;  and he will leave  his responsibilities  to you.
“I am now going.  May  God  make  your  lifetime good.  Greet  
your father,  your mother,  your younger  ones, ’most especially  
your  immediate  younger  sister,  Mary,  that stands  at the peak of 
your  heart.  Goodbye. ”

That was what  the man told me and handed  me over to the
man in rag with the instruction  that he should  take me back to 
the path, which  he did. But it was when  I got to the road that 
1 asked  from the man how he got to where  I saw him, and he 
explained  that he was taken to the place by the same people  
that took me there, the  dwarfs  having  one eye on each of their  
foreheads.  When  we got to the road, I thought  the man in rag 
would  go back  but he did not. He faced  the road I was passing  
and we were  going  together.  He walked  until  we got to the road  
that led to our farm  and I branched,  but he proceeded.
When  my father  saw me, he became  surprised  because  the 
river  was extremely  full and he never  thought  I could  come  to 
the farm.  When  I narrated  the tale of how  I came  across  the short  
people  that pursued,  caught  and took me to the forest  to meet  
that mysterious  man,  he became  more  frightened.  He told me to 
seal my lips and refrain  from  telling  people  about  it for it is not 
all that a little child ’s eyes see that he says with  his mouth.
I was very happy  that I got to the farm when the fresh  
maize  was matured.  I ate to the extent  that maize  grains  were  
clearly  visible  in my feces.  Farm life was enjoyable  during  
that time.  The growing  farm  products  were so fresh;  yam  plants  
have grown  wild and coiled round stakes;  the okra leaves  
were phenomenally  large;  the spinach  leaves  were  wonderfully  
lengthy;  the leaves of Osun vegetable  were extraordinarily  
broad;.  ‘Corchorus  olitorius  ’ vegetable  leaves  were extremely  green.  
Gourd  plant  took  over  the ground  and mushrooms  started  
growing  up on the dead  woods.  Haaa!  It was a great  season  in 
my father ’s farm.  When  I finished  eating,  I went  to set my traps.
In the evening,  I returned  to the hut and went  to my uncle.  I 
told him that  I wanted  to begin  setting  traps  and he gave  me one. 
I took it to our maize  plantation  and set it on the routes  of the
grasscutters behind  our maize  farm.  In the morning  of the,  second  
day, it caught  nothing.  Though  the grasscutters  came  to eat maize,  
they evaded  the trap.  But when  I went  to check  it on the morning  
of the third  day, I discovered  that it had caught  a grasscutter  by the 
arm, but the beast  escaped  with  the half-cut  arm.
My smaller  traps had started  catching  rats on the second  
day of setting  them.  The one I set on the boundary  beside  our 
cocoa  plantation  caught  a squirrel  on the third  day. On my fourth  
day on our farm,  one of the hunters  in our neighbourhood  killed  
a deer. He carried  it to the hut, cut it into pieces  and gave us 
the young  children  much  splinters  that we roasted  and ate. He 
gave  the elders  more  meat  than he gave  us. The one he gave,  my 
father  was the biggest  among  the ones  he gave  the inhabitants of 
the farmstead  because  my father  was the head  of the settlement.  
However,  it is saddening  to tell you that something  happened  on 
that day that  pained  me seriously.  I broke  a water  gourd  as I was 
coming  back from the stream  but my father  did not scold me 
because  I had never  done so before.  Hence,  he regarded  it as a 
mistake.  However,  he warned  me never  to repeat  the act to evade  
future  punishment.

That was how I enjoyed  the farm until I returned  to the 
village.  The river had reduced  in level by the time we returned  
home.  A bridge  had been  constructed  on it and we passed  on it.
But  what  became  of the person  I saw on my way  to the farm,  
the man  that touched  my head  with  a staff?  He was no more  seen 
by me again  till today  but I came  across  him sometimes  in my 
dreams  and I would  tell you how I do. 
The first time I saw him, he appeared  to me on the way to 
our farm.  He was without  a staff  but he had wings.  He drew  near 
me, placed  me on his shoulder,  and started  flying.  He later took
me to the sky to the extent  that I thought  I was leaving the  world  
for heaven’s environment.  A little  while later,  he stayed  in the sky 
with me on his shoulder.  He told me to look at the ground  and I 
obeyed.  In response to  his enquiry  about  what  I saw, I told him I 
saw nothing  because  the whole  world  appeared  uniform  to me.
After  this, he dipped  his hand into-his  pocket  and took out 
a pair of eyeglasses,  put it on my eyes and instructed  me to look 
at the gourd.  I obeyed  and I saw all the things-  in the world.  I 
told him so. He then asked  me a question  thus: “My child, can 
something  as big as this be without  an administrator? ” I responded  
thus: “Impossible,  a thing cannot  be as big as this without  an 
administrator.”  He probed  further  thus: “If it is true  that the  world  
has an administrator,  who is he?” I also answered  that “God is the 
administrator  of the world. ” He smiled  and said, “Be going. Don’t 
forget  what you have told me; put it in your mind throughout  
your  [lifetime. ” After  saying  this, he flew  back  to the ground  with  
me and-greeted  me “Goodbye. ” He continued  greeting  as he was 
going  and I continued  answering  him till I woke.
After  waking  up and discovering  I was dreaming,  I became  
frightened.  But I did not come across  the man in my dreams  
again  until  the third  year. In the third  year  after  this, I slept  again  
and saw him in a dream.  He appeared  just like before  and placed  
me on his shoulder,  flying.  On getting  to the part of  the sky where  
he usually  stopped,  he did not.  After  flying  for a while,  he got to 
a place  where  there was a very big bright  light.  After  focusing  
my eyes on the light,  I discovered  that it turned  to a house.  The 
man then entered  the aerial  house  with me. On entering,  I saw 
that the whole  floor  was made  of gold. Fright  deterred  me from  
stepping  on it, but the man  that brought  me inside  told me to do so.
After  this, he took  me inside  one of the rooms  in the house.


When  we got there,  he opened  all the Windows  and took me to 
one of them with the instruction  that I should  look outward;  I 
obliged.  On doing so, I saw a flowing  river  on the ground,  which  
'"appeared  near but was really  far away.  The man asked  whether  
I knew  where  the river  was and I answered  in the negative.  He 
then told me that-it  was in the world.  I was surprised  that the 
world  could  be so near  to where  we were  because  we had flown  
really  high.
The man then told me to be observing  the river and take,  
note of  nil what  I would  see. I fixed my eyes oh the ground.  He 
closed  the door  of the room  and went  elsewhere.
A little  while later,  I saw  an old man that came  to bathe  in the 
river.  He came  with  a bag of money.  After  bathing,  he left, leaving  
the bag of money  behind.  Later, a chimpanzee  came out of the 
forest and  opened  the bag and started  pouring  its content away.  It 
then left some  money  inside the bag after  pouring  some  away.
After  his departure,  a man came  to bathe.  When  he got to 
the river, he saw the remaining  money  in the bag; he took it 
and fled. After  his departure,  an old man came  to bathe in the 
river.  The owner  of the money  came  with a gun as he was busy  
bathing.  He saw  the old man  and asked  him about  the money,  but 
he said he did not see any money  when  he got to the river. The 
owner  of the money  disbelieved  him and shot him dead.
After  that, I saw nobody  again.  Soon,  the person  that took  
me to the room  entered.  He asked  me what  I saw in the river  and 
I told him everything.  He then said, “Judge  the case: who was 
guilty  of all the people  that came  to the river? ” I tried to judge  
but it proved  difficult.

He said, “Young  man, the work of God is mysterious.  
Nobody  discovers  the root of a stone.  No one finds the root of
his creator.  No one knows  how  the heaven  came  into being.  The 
people  of the world  don’t have the power.  The people  of the 
world  see faintly  in the mirror.  There  is a boundary  between  the 
world  and the heaven.  None  of those  you saw was guilty.  The 
money  did not belong  to the person  that brought  it to the river  
because  he stole  it somewhere.-The  chimpanzee-came  out to pour  
off the  fraudulently  acquired  ones out of the bag. The man that 
took the money  was the grandchild  of the owner  of the money  
who was trading  with  it at the beginning.  His great  grandfather  
was the owner  of the money  and they  had been  using  the money  
for business  in his lineage.

“The great grandfather  of the man that was killed  was the' 
murderer  of the great  grandfather  of the person  that killed  him 
unjustifiably.  God avenges  the sins of the father  on the children  
and reciprocates  the good deeds of the father  to the children.  
Everyone ’s profit  is with God. A man cannot  do bad and inherit  
good.  A planter  of a yam seedling  of wickedness  plants  it on his 
child ’s head because  it is the head of beans  that it uses to open  
up the ground,  and it  is the head of the anthill  that collapses  on 
itself. A doer of evil is always  pursued  by evil. So, put whatever  
you have seen at the peak  of your  heart  and be using  it as far as 
you remain  in the world. ”

That was what the man said. He then carried  me on his 
shoulder  flying  like before  and continued  the flight  till he was 
in the world  terrain.  After  this, he brought  me down from his 
shoulder  and patted  my head as he prepared  to depart,  but I did 
not want him to go because  had  started  getting  fond of him.  
My personal  opinion  would  not however  stand  in the way of his 
decision  to go. I became  sorrowful  when  he wanted  to depart.  He 
appealed  to me and promised  to visit me after  that day. He was
flying and greeting  me, “Goodbye,  my child* goodbye.  Greet  
your father  and mother.  Greet your younger  ones, especially  
your  mother ’s children  that are at the pinnacle  of your  heart. ” I 
was answering  his greetings.  I continued  answering  till I woke  
up, and the dream  was like a real-life  occurrence  to me.
I did,  not meet the man again  in my dream  for a very long 
time. I was thinking  that I would  dream  of him in the third  year 
again.  I started  observing  my sleeps  in the third  year. I slept-for  
days and nights  without  dreaming  of him but when I stopped  
thinking  about  him and the year  was approaching the  end; on the 
night  between the  fourth  day and the fifth  day of August,  I dreamt  
and saw him as usual. He did not change  his clothes  or look 
older.  I was well greeted  by him; he placed  me op his shoulder,  
flying away. After flying  beyond  the world environment,  we' 
went  farther  than  before;  we arrived  at a place  that looked  like a 
plain  ground.  He brought  me down.  The place  was so beautiful  
that I almost  regarded  it as being  more than an ordinary  plain  
land. Varieties  of sweet-scenting  flowers  were there, but the 
paths  in-between  the linearly  planted  flowers were  made  of gold  
and all the flower  pots were  made  of gold.  All the materials  seen 
by me Were golden.  Just before  me was a beautiful  mansion  
incomparable  to any of the palaces  in the whole  world.  The man  
and I walked  into the house  through  the golden  way.
On getting  to the mansion,  what  I saw  there  were  so precious  
to the extent  that their  cost was beyond  evaluation.  All the seats  
there were made from diamonds,  and the floor and seat rugs 
were sewn  with golden  threads.  I was terrified  on getting  to the 
house,  stepping  on the floor  reluctantly  but the man  that brought  
me to the mansion  disregarded  its beauty.  He was walking  on 
the golden  floor indifferently.  He held me and told me to follow
him. He was holding-  on to me till we entered  a room in the 
mansion.

When  we got to the room,  he opened  all its windows  and 
took  me to one of them.  He instructed  me to peep  and I obliged.  I 
was looking  at the ground  and it seemed  as if it was  near.  The  man 
left me as I was doing  that; but before  departing,  he instructed  
me to be noticing all!  would  see very well and that he would  
soon  be back.  I continued  watching  the ground  in anticipation  of 
what  would  happen.
This is what  I saw: A big road, big enough  to occupy  four 
vehicles  moving  simultaneously.  There  was a small  thick  wall 
that was about  one foot in height  which ’divided  the road into 
two. I also saw a healthy-looking  man in a gorgeous  cloth, an 
expensive  pair of shoes  and a cap. He was followed  by a lot of 
people;  some  of whom  were in costly  attires  like his own while  
others  followed  him as servants:  He went  to one part of the' big 
route and he was receding  cheerful  greetings  from onlookers.  
After  this, I saw a man  that was in a white  cloth,  coming  alone  at 
the right  side of the road.  The final wall separated  the two  men.

Some  moments  after which  they had been trekking,  I saw 
the wealthy  man  and  his followers  as they  branched  and followed  
the man in white  clothes,  got hold of him and poured  a lot of 
kerosene  on his Body.  He did not utter a word  as they did that. 
After  that, they struck  a stick  of matches  and set  the man  on fire; 
the fire was burning  his clothes.  Fright  overcame,  me, thinking  
lithe man would  die..  As the fire was burning,  the man’s, clothes  
did not bum at all. The fire,  was burning  reluctantly  and going  
off intermittently.  When  eventually  the fire got extinguished,  
instead  of the man ’s clothes  to get dirty  because  of soot, it was 
as white  as if it was  just,  collected  from  the laundry.

Some moments  after this, the palatial  mansion of that 
wealthy  man shook  and fell down but the rich man and his 
retinue  of courtiers  had gone  far, ignorant  of its fall.
After  this, I saw the wealthy  man and his followers  dancing  
as a drum beat for them.  They  were  dancing,  honouring  and 
praising the  wealthy  man, spraying  money  oh his forehead.  All 
at the same  time,  they danced  that way until they got to a river. What  surprised  me most  was that immediately  they  danced  to the 
bank of  the river,  his followers  carried  him and threw  him into 
the river.  He started  swimming  until he was able to swim  to the 
river ’s second  bank.  His clothes  were  wet. He took to his heels  
immediately  he swam  out with  the presumption  to go home  and 
change  his wet clothes  but when  he got there  he met no house.  
The house  had collapsed  and those men did not stop pursuing  
him. They later got hold of him, and tied him up. A stone  was 
tied to his side, another  one tied to his neck  and yet another  to 
his legs, and he was carried back to  the river. On  getting there,  
cried bitterly.  He begged them passionately  but they were  
indifferent to  his pleas.  He was thrown  into the river  and he  sank.  
I felt  for him greatly.

Having  finished  with the rich man, they ran to the other  
man who-was  going quietly  on his own. My observation  of the 
man from  afar showed that he had worn  a new  cloth. He  wore a 
golden  cloth,  a diamond  cap and a pair of silvery  shoes.  Those  
that formerly  followed  the rich man got to him and prostrated;  
but instead  of answering  them,  he drove  them  away  with  a cane.
Those  were my observations  from the window'  before  the 
person  that  put me there  touched  me on my back  and I faced  him. 
He enquired  about  what  I saw and I explained  to him. He asked,  
whether  I understood  what  I observed  and I responded  that I did
not. He then started  unveiling  the imports  of my observation  
saying,  “My child, what you have seen was an example.  The 
place you saw on the ground  from the window  was not in the 
world  neither  was it a heavenly  settlement.  It lies in the middle  
of the Earth  and the Heaven.  The building  there  was constructed  
by the creator.  The wealthy  man  seen  by you is Arekereke  
okunrin.  He is not a human  being  but a devilish  spirit.  He was 
formerly  under  the Devil  but as wicked  as the Devil  was  regarded  
among  human  beings,  Arekereke-okunrin  was more,  wicked than 
him. Formerly,  he was one of the creatures  living  with God but 
because  his characters  were at variance  with that of the Angels  
who were holy creatures,.  Arekereke-okunrin  left heaven  to 
associate  with  the Devil.

“When  he got there, the Devil put him in the seventh  
position  among  his messengers  but he remained  the strongest  
and cleverest  of all creatures.  He fraudulently  usurped  the power  
of his seniors  by covertly  and quietly  going  to the Devil, the 
king of Hell Fire, to fabricate  lies against  them. Gradually,  he 
rose to the position  of the Second-in-Command  of the Devil.  
Hardly  had he got to the position  that he conspired  with the 
servants  under  him to execute  a coup d’etat against  the Devil.  
Had  the Devil  been  dethroned,  he would  have  had nowhere  to go 
because  he had already  lost his place  in paradise.  He wanted  the 
Devil  to be totally  destroyed  to pave  way for his own  leadership  
in hell fire. Eventually,  the Devil  heard  about  his conspiracy  and 
he was consequently  driven  out of the Devil ’s kingdom,  which  
culminated  in his living  where  you saw him. I am glad today  
that the man ’s destruction  happened  before  your  eyes.
“When Arekereke-okunrin  got to the settlement  at the 
middle  of heaven  and earth;  he continued  in his bad manners.

His house seen by you was built with other people ’s money;  
the proceeds  from  bribery.  He was too corrupt  to a point  that he 
could  not do anything for  anyone  without  receiving  gratification.  
Through  this means,  he put the ignoramuses  in enviable  and 
strategic  positions;  he maligned  the innocent  and surrounded  
himself  with numerous  malicious  creatures...  those that were  
following  him.
“The second  man in white  cloth is an honest-man  despite  
the tricks of Arekereke-okunrin  to turn him to a downtrodden  
person,  he failed.  Rather  than falling  down,  the righteous  man 
was always  successful  in his endeavours.  The dishonest  people  
were in turn suffered.  The followers  of Arekereke-okunrin  were  
dishonest;  they  praised  him in his presence  and condemned  him 
in his absence.  They  were  united  by conspiracy.  That very day 
they followed  him out, praising  and honouring  him was the day 
they conspired  to eliminate  the man and also destroy  Arekereke-  
okunrin's  mansion.  They  planned  the destruction  of his building  
and turned  against  him until  they  terminated  his life. It was after  
Arekereke-okunrin's  downfall  that they  ran back  to the righteous  
man.  Didn’t you see how  they  were  driven  back  by him?
“My child, this is a- lesson for you; keep it properly.  
Continue  to tell the whole  world  the truth as far as you live. 
Truth is energetic;  truth is eternally  stable. Dishonesty  is 
rootless;  lie paves  way for the ridicule  of a liar. It cuts a liar into 
pieces.  It dishonours  a man. Fear death,  fear disease,  fear the 
worldly  problems  but never  fear to tell the truth. Love friends,  
love relatives,  love all human  beings  but do not fall in love with  
dishonesty.  If a person  is as beautiful  as a beauty-spirit  and has  
varieties  of clothes  like a chameleon,  dishonesty  reduces  him. 
to emptiness.  A liar is worthless.  A person  that often changes
his utterances  is worthless;  A reliable  man ’s word  should  remain  
unchanged.  A backbiter  and gossip  finds' it difficult  to coexist  
with  a group  of firm people.  He will ever  remain  in the group  of 
retrogressive.  An unrighteous  child  loses his honour  in the midst  
of elders because  his truths  are regarded  as falsehood.
“Go now, my child.  Take  note of all those  words  and keep  
them,  in an important  portion  of your heart because  you have  
an important  assignment  to do for the people  of the world.  
Goodbye.  Extend  my greetings  to your father,  mother,  younger  
brothers  and sisters.  Foster  cooperation  among  your younger  
ones because  a day will come  when  that father  you are looking  
up to will not be in the world  again.  You will only remain  the 
leader  of your  younger  ones. It-is a very big load. May God 
make  for you a cushioning  wrapper  to put it on.”
Immediately  he finished  his words,  he held me by the hand - 
and-we  moved  out of the house.  He carried  me and when  we got 
to the -outermost  entrance  door of the house.  I thought  he would  
fly with me the way he brought  me but he did not. He at once  
carried  me and threw  me down  into the sky; I was going  down.  
Initially,  I thought  I-would  die. He continued  greeting  me and!  
was answering  him. I woke  up immediately  my feet touched  the
ground.. -
I had the  dream  on the night  between  Saturday  and Sunday.  
My father  returned  from the farm on Saturday.  At daybreak,  I 
went to greet him  in his room and told him about  my dream.  
After  telling  him, he said I should  keep it secret  because  God 
wanted  to make  use of me.



Chapter  2
The Meeting  with  Ireke  Onibudo.
I did not dream  of the man again  but something  happened  two 
years  ago when  I saw something  related  to him. It occurred  this 
way: It was a tradition  for me during  the time I want  to tell you 
about to be savouring  the comfort  of natural  fresh air every  
evening  5n a small  farm  path in the town  where  I was working.
On the day I am talking  about,  I strolled  more than I used  
to do before..  Since  the path led to farms  where  people  usually  
went,  I was meeting  farmers  in the course  of my strolling  but a 
little  while  later  I got to an  area  inhabited  by a giant  tree; nobody  
was within  the vicinity  except  me. I then decided  to return  
home.  I suddenly  saw a man that held me by the wrist.  His hand  
was extremely  cold. I became  excited  and quickly  turned  back  
my face. On looking  at him, I saw a handsome  man in a red 
woolen  cloth.  His face was bewitching.  He smiled  on seeing  my 
countenance,  exhibiting  a set of very  white  teeth.  Thereafter,  he 
greeted  me well as if he had known  me before.  I responded  to 
his greetings  well also as if I ^ew  who he was so that I would  
not look disrespectful  because  some  people  hate being  told they 
were  never  met before.
After  that, I proceeded  on the path leading  to the town  and 
he also faced the same direction  but I stopped  looking  back  
again  after  I had observed  his face; my thought  was that only  the 
two of  'us were  going.  I later  heard  a person ’s voice  from  behind  
shouting,  “Sir, why didn’t you wait for us-again? ”
IREKE  ONIBUDO0


I looked  back  when  the man  finished  his statement  and I saw 
a retinue  of six men carrying  big loads.  This made  me discover  
the status  of the man.  I became  surprised  when  a member  of his 
retinue  asked  him, “Can ’t you ask from this man if he knows  
where  we are going? ” he then answered,  This is the man we 
are visiting  - that is me. The second  member  also pointed  his 
finger  at me probing  further  “This  man? ” The man  replied,  “Yes, 
he is.” The man looked  at my face again  and said, “Are you the 
child  of Akintunde  whose  father  is Beyioku?”  I also answered,  
“I am.” He then  patted  me on the shoulder  and said, “Proceed  to 
your  house;  it’s your  house  that I’m going  to. I then asked  him 
a question  thus, “Please,  do not think  I am disrespectful.  I can t 
recall  where  we met again. ” But he smiled  and said that he did 
not want  to disclose  his identity  yet and promised  to do that after  
reaching  my house.  Both of  us then continued  our journey.  That  
was how I that strolled  out became  a host of numerous  guests.
When  I got home,  the members  of my household  and my 
neighbours  became  surprised  to see that I came back with a 
lot of visitors.  I quickly  called  my wife to the backyard  to tell 
her immediately  how I came  across  the man and his aides.  My 
wife then asked,  “What do we do?” I answered.  There  is no 
other  thing  but to begin  preparing  food for the guests. ” I asked  
her whether  there was soup in the house;  and she responded  
affirmatively.  She explained  further  that she had  just prepared  a 
pot of soup with some  pieces  of fish in the afternoon.
f Dusk came quickly  because  I strolled  out in the evening.  
The meal  was ready  by two p.m. The principal  guest  was invited  
to our dining  table and we ate together.  The aides ’ meals  were  
served  separately.
I had sent for palm  wine immediately  I returned  from my
strolling  and it was brought  before  we had our supper. I told 
them to keep it inside my room. My child was instructed  to 
bring  it outside  after having  our meal. Our guests  were served  
the undiluted  palm  wine,  which  they  really  enjoyed.
Later,  I brought  out seats to the front of my house  and we 
sat down  together.  The moonlight  was as bright  as the day and 
the sky was very  clear.
We were discussing  as we sat down.  We discussed  about  
the fullness  of the moonlight;  the dryness  of the season  which  
"had resulted  in complete  dryness  of all things; forest  plants  
were dry; the land was dry; the small  streams  were  dry; human  
beings  were  thirsty:  animals  were  thirsty.  We also rubbed  minds 
on how the dry season  creates  fear in some  peoples ’ mind.  How  
diseases  spread  quickly  due to the worrisome  and hostile  dust 
that creates  unrest  for people.  How  the dry season  served  as both  
the harbinger  of evil on one hand and the harbinger  of success  
on another.  A season  when all the nooks  and crannies  of the 
bush  would  be visible;  a season  of warmth  for people;  a season  
devoid  of coldness  of soil unlike  the rainy season.  The period  
when launderers  are opportune  to have sun for drying  their  
clothes.  Rain does not act as an impediment  to any important  
ceremony. No tree falls across  roads  and paths.  No mud  splashes  
on one ’s trousers.  The dry season  is different  from the raining  
season  in those aforementioned  ways. My guest and I looked  
up and observed  the presence  of stars,  in the sky. We discussed  
about  them. We spoke  of the level of God ’s wisdom.  Either  it 
rains  or not, the light  of God in the sky does  not go off. God does  
not look around  for kerosene  to borrow  from anyone ’s house.  
God ’s lamp does not break;  the kerosene  in it does not dry up. 
Wind  is also powerless  on the sky lit by God ’s lamp.
IREKE  ONIBUDO


We were discussing  on those phenomena  when my guest  
said we should  enter, that he had something  to tell me. I 
concurred.  I called  on my servants but I heard  no response  from  
anyone.  On doing  that, my son that had been  with  me throughout  
the dialogue  between  the man and I said that I should  not call 
them again  because  they had strolled  out. He and  his younger  
ones packed  in the seats.  The man and I entered  my study room.
I then gave  him a seat to sit on. I also sat on a seat, cross-legged  
and.  placed  my ankle on a table. My cheek  rested  on my left 
hand. I then told him to start his speech.  But before  he started,,  
he instructed  me to bring  out my writing  materials  because  he 
would  want all he wanted  to tell me documented.  I obliged.  
Having  done  that, he opened  up thus:
“You young  man,  I am sent here today  to .discuss  .with  you. 
I am sent to you so that you can show  the world  my life. I am 
sent to you as somebody  that almost  fell but was raised  by God.  
Proclaim  my life history  to the children;  proclaim  it to the adults;  
tell it to the kings  in regalia;  blow.it  to the poor?  tell it to those  
on sickbeds;  tell it to the worthless  and those  that have suffered  
deprivations.
“Look  at me  very  well. Look  at me repeatedly.  Look  at me 
to know  who I am. I am a man  whose  eyes have  seen  mysterious  
things  before.  I am a man  called  Ireke  Onibudo  who  has travelled  
the length  and breadth  of the world.  I have crossed  the seas that 
surround  the earth. I have travelled  on the oceans  in numerous  
countries.  I have been to a mysteriously  dark forest  and I have  
been into the midst  of lions and leopards,  wolfs  and bush  pigs,  
tigers and chimpanzees,  cobras  and pythons,  cattle egrets  and 
bats, ifoko  and mahogany  trees,  and the sparrows  with  long  tail- 
wings.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

“I, ireke  Onibudo,  Was the-man  you saw in those  old days  
you were a kid when  those dwarfs  carried  you to the man that 
Was in white  apparels.  I was that man in rags who stood  on my 
feet  when  that mysterious  creature  was telling  you how your  
future,  would  be.”
I became  surprised  when the man.  said that he was the 
tattered-looking  man seen by me when  I was a kid because  he 
had changed  very  much,  but his changes  to that level  baffled  me. 
On observing  him more  closely,  I discovered  he was; he had hot 
become  older. It seemed  to me as if he was growing  younger.  
When  I watched  him very  well and discovered  his true identity,  I 
held  him  and he also held  me as we heartily  exchanged  greetings.  
After  that, I drew  his seat much  closer  to my table  and got ready  
to write.  I told him to start his narration  and he took  off thus:
“My friend,  before  starting  my talk, I have,  to thank  you 
for your hospitality  to me since I have arrived.  Despite  your  
ignorance  of my personality,  you took extreme  care of me. You 
accepted  me whole-heartedly.  You pampered  and honoured  me. 
My followers  were also catered  for by you. You did not feel 
reluctant  to spend  for me. I am surprised  and not surprised  for 
I knew  the type of man you would  become  when  I saw you in 
your youthful  days. I am very grateful.  The fountain  of your  
blessing  will never  dry. May your comfort  never  be spoilt  by 
men. May  God not dispossess  you of your  goodwill.
“I will not tell you my life history  today  because  the night  
has already  fallen.  You will be told that tomorrow  morning,  i
will tell you a story  before  We sleep  tonight  to teach  you a lesson.

“If you are cheated  by somebody  in this world,  please,  
always  think deeply  before  you decide  to revenge.  There are 
some  cheatings  that could  not be revenged  because  a powerless
IREKE  ONIBUDO

man that wants  to shake  off oppression  will continue  receiving  
cumulative  punishment.  The world  is filled  with foolish people.  
A learner  that wants  to revenge  the punishment  of his teacher  
is behaving  like a foolish,  monkey.  Can a servant  be wiser  than 
his master?  Likewise,  some  apprentices,  when  punished  by their  
masters,  become  stiff-necked,  looking  for the downfall  of their  
masters  instead  of facing  squarely  their  apprenticeship.  They  act 
as crazy  fellows  and endure  all the difficulties  till they  .become  
masters  to other people.  They would  be boasting  about what  
they have  planned  to use as a revenge.  They  have forgotten that  
before  a man gets to a great position,  he has to wade through  
a great  suffering.  A man planning  to be in respectable  position  
must possess  much endurance.  A servant  should  not be wiser  
than his master.
“I also want  you to know  that there  are some  people  that are 
like what  a thorny  stump  is to the sole amongst  the human  race.  
Those  whose  consciences  are dead;  it can only  be resurrected  by 
God. Whenever  such people  do evil to you, take to your heels  
because  you could  be a victim  of another  evil deed  in the process  
of revenging.  The,  longer  you stand  in their  midst,  the more  evil, 
they do. .Those  type of people  have really  discovered  the depth  
of evil deeds  to a point  that catching  thein  is very  uneasy.  Never  
emulate  a stubborn  troublemaker  because  you could  be caught  
on y our first day of emulation  and get punished  greatly.
“Young  children  should  be very careful;  they should  run 
away from a bad group  because  a lot of young  children  have  
suffered  through  their association  with bad children.  Soon  than 
after joining  the group,  the bad child would  start oppressing  
them  and whenever  they  plan to revenge,  much  injury  would  be 
inflicted  on them.
IREKEONIBUDO

“This  world  is still enjoyable  in a way. It is good  that only  a 
few people  are there  without  masters  and those  that are without  
masters  have  God as one. If he is cheated  by a man,  his failure  
to revenge  could be  regarded  as foolishness.  It is better for 
one to report  the oppressor  to another  man rather  than looking 
for vengeance  which  would  be as if one is pursuing  a lunatic.  
Anyone  that pursues  a mad man is also mad.
“Vengeance  sometimes  procreates  punishment  for pupils.  
Instead  of reporting  a student  that bullied  them  to a teacher, they 
would  revenge.  Eventually,  both of them  would  be fighting  and 
they  would  be taken  to their  teacher  who would  pronounce  their  
guiltiness  and punish  them.  He could  tell them  to remain  in the 
school  compound  when  their  colleagues  are free to go  out. They  
could also be flogged.  The flogging  would  make them weep,  
tears would roll down  their faces;  mucus  would  come out of 
their  nostrils;  they would  caress  their  buttocks  with both hands;  
their buttocks  would  swell up; painful  ‘beads ’ would  swell up 
on their  buttocks.  They  would  then result  to pleading  for mercy  
thus, ‘Please  sir; forgive  me sir; I will never  behave  in such  way 
again. ’
“That is how it is among  the elders;  some of them are 
wicked.  If they  have  grudges  against  a person,  they  will continue  
pursuing  him from  a valley  to mountain  in order  to revenge  what  
another  person  has done  to them.  If such  person  is not careful, he 
may meet  his demise  in the process. If  a person  is not guilty  at 
- a stage  of a controversy,  he could  become  guilty  at a later  .stage.  
My friend,  I want  to tell you a story.  The story  is i bit long  but I would  want  us to end our discussion  with it tonight. 
“There  was an animal  in the olden days called  Wrestler-  
cat. It was a stubborn  and cunning  animal.  It resembled  a wolf
IREKE  ONIBUDO


very  umch  but it had a shell on its back  like the tortoise.  A weak  
animal it  was. His-Weakness  notwithstanding,  all other,  animals  
ran away  from  him because  of his intrigues.  If he saw an animal,  
he would  be playing  with it until he would  playfully  lead  the 
animal  to the lion ’s den. He would  climb  a tree whenever  the 
lion,  showed  up - he had the ability  to climb trees. The other  
animal  would  be left on the ground  and devoured  by the lion.
■ “There came a time that the tiger started  friendship  with  
the Wrestler-cat.  They  visited  each other ’s houses  and strolled  
out together.  Gradually,  they  became  very close  friends  and this 
generated  the attraction  of other  animals.
“One day, the tigress  Went  to the town  and heard  the other  
animals  talking  negatively  about  her husband.  She then decided  
to put an end to the-friendship  of her husband  and the Wrestler-  
cat.-On  getting  home,  she called,  her husband  to a covert  place  
and spoke  to him about  the matter  thus:
‘My husband,  the emperor  of the forest,  draw  closer  to me;
I have a matter  to discuss  with you. What  is the basis of your  
relationship  with  Wrestler-cat?  What  brought  it about?  Can ’t he 
stay in his house?  Is friendship  by force?  Are you his age mate?  
Or what  has brought  about  his regular  visitation  here?  You had 
better  part with him; part with Wrestler-cat.  The other  animals  
are saying  bad things  about  you. You are growing  older  and as 
an elderly  man, you should  not allow a disrespectful  act from  
a younger  person.  What  I heard  has been very painful;  I am so 
unhappy  about  the whole  thing  I heard.  I must  not see Wrestler-  
cat in this house  again. ’
“That  was how the tiger ’s wife told him but an animal  will 
always  behave  as one.  Instead  of ruminating  on the advice  of his 
wife,  the tiger  picked  a quarrel'with  her. He bit the ears of his
IREKE  ONIBUDO


wife and the wife revenged  by biting  his nose.  They  fought  each  
other  and destroyed  the peace  in their  home  for someone ’s sake.  
The tigress  was heavy  with pregnancy  during  the -time and she 
delivered  an hunched-back  baby. The child  was the seventh  of 
their  offspring.  The wife  then held her peace  after  the tiger  had 
reacted  unpleasantly  to her warning.
“On a particular  day, the Wrestler-cat  paid the tiger a visit.  
The tiger  had  just  caught  and killed  a deer. The two of them  ate 
the whole  deer  without  giving  any portion  to the tigress  after  the 
meal.  The Wrestler-cat  stood  up and spoke  thus:
‘My dear friend,  the tiger, second-in-command  to the lion, 
an important  chief  among  the beasts.  It is -my pleasure  to be 
your friend.  Though,  some people  are sad over our friendship  
but they are joking.  ,Our friendship  will forever  remain.  We are 
destined  to be friends.  We should.be  happy  over this to cause  
much psychological  discomfort  for our sworn enemies.  I so 
much love you. If you were a woman,  I would  have married  
you. Despite  the fact that you are not a woman,  there are still 
some other  good  things  we can do for each other. I want  to do 
something  that will brightly  remain  in our memory  as long as 
we live. Our friendship  should  not be allowed  to end with our 
demise.  It should  be extended  to our. offsprings.  Our friendship  
has transformed  to brotherliness.  May it never  be spoilt  by God.
‘I want  to make  tribal  marks  on the body  of your children.  
The mark  is going  to be entirely  different  from  the ones  on the 
other  animals.  All other  .animals  would  know  that you are more  
important  than them.  After  making  the marks,  the lion would  
know  that he is not worthy  to be called  the king of the beasts; 
he would  know  you are the real king. I want to beautify  your  
daughters  to the extent  that the entire  male  animals  would  want
IREKE  ONIBUDO


them  for marriage.  Whether  the lion likes  it or not,  he would  like 
to become  your in-law;  the fox would  bring  numerous  fowls  to 
persuade  you; the deer  would  visit  you with  his long horns;  and 
the elephant  would  also show  up with  his long hands.  I am sure 
that after  making  the tribal  marks;  your  honourable  status  would  
be a thing  of surprise  to you.  I think  what  I would  do one day is 
to call a meeting  of all animals  in which you  would  be absent.
‘After calling  the meeting,  I would  tell them  the situation  
of things  and we would  unanimously  agree  to remove  the lion 
from  the throne.  You would  then become  our king. That  was all 
I wanted  to tell you. The ball is now in your court. If you are 
interested,  let us make tribal marks  for your Children  to pave  
way for wealth.  If not, let us leave  them  and repudiate  honour. ’
“That was what the wicked  animal  said. He rubbed  a 
poisonous  meal with the common  salt; ‘the tiger swallowed  it 
and responded  thus;
‘My good friend;  my nice friend;  my-friend  indeed;  my 
honourable  friend;  my worthy  friend;  my morning  friend;  my 
afternoon-friend;  my evening  friend;  my worldly  friend;  my 
heavenly  friend;  my friend  from the head to the nose tip; my 
friend  from  neck  to sole; friend  that is more  important  than my 
mother;  friend  that is more important  than my father;  a friend  
that is more important  than a relative;  a friend  that is better  
than a wife. I thank you. I thank  you greatly.  Your  love to me is 
consistently  surprising.  You always  look for my progress  every  
day. I have listened  to your words.  Whatever  I have is yours;  
whatever  you possess  is mine. Why should  you be asking  me 
again?  Making  marks  for my children  is now a must in respect  
of your  utterances.  We should  now be planning  on how to make  
the marks.  I will find all the necessary  materials,  which  I want  you  to 
tell me now.  We should  also  agree  on the day  for the exercise.  I now  rest
my case. ’

“When Tiger ended his response,  Wrestler-cat  Reacted  
cheerfully  thus:
‘What,  we shall do is to look for various  ingredients  for 
making  the tribal marks.  We should  disregard  the cost of the 
materials  because  of the advantages  in making  tribal  marks.  You 
should  get six hundred  tubers-  of yam, six hundred  plantains,  
six hundred  cobs of maize,  five hundred  bitter kola-nuts,  five 
hundred  kola-nuts,  five hundred  palm kernels,  two hundred  
and forty cowries,  six hundred  and fort)^ beads,  eight hundred  
gallons  of palm oil, eight hundred  gallon^  of palm kernel  oil, 
several pots,  eight  hundred  gallons  of melon  (, one thousand,  
four hundred  aria sixty feathers  of woodcock,  one thousand,  
four hundred  and sixty feathers  of aluko, one thousand  four 
hundred  and sixty  feathers  of parrot,  seven  ducks,  seven  cocks,  
seven  turkeys,  seven  pigeons,  seven  cows,,  seven  horses,  seven  
donkeys,  .seven  goats,  seven  sheep,  seven  dogs, the feathers  of 
sparrow,  the feathers  of dove, the feathers  of cattle egret,,  the 
feathers  of swallow,  the feathers  of vulture,  the head  of a cobra,  
the head  of  a python,  the head  of a viper,  the horn  of a rhinoceros,  
an axe, a cutlass  and a knife.
Therefore,  you should  build small house beside  your  
personal  house  by the riverbank.  It should  have a window  and a 
door.  Those  materials  I told you to find would  not be enough  but 
I would  make  provision  for the rest.  You should  bring  them  to my 
house  when  they ar6 ready.  The concoction  for the assignment  
will be prepared  in my house.  It will be taken  to the small  house  
after  preparation.  Your  children  and I will reside  in the house  for 
the seven  days during  which  the assignment  will last.  ’
IREKE  ONIBUDO






“My friend,  you would  doubtlessly  be surprised  like the  
people  would  as a-result of those  things  demanded  by Wrestler-  
cat but Tiger  got all those things.  Tiger ’s house  was bounded  
with  Wrestler-cat ’s house  by a big river. The tiger  built  the house  
he was instructed  to "build beside  his (tiger ’s) house.  It had a 
room  and a window.  Those  Were  the assignments  and they then 
agreed  on the. day to make  the tribal  marks.
“Before  the commencement  of the assignment,  Wrestler-cat  
had carried  some  of those  edible items  to the building.  He took  
along a  knife  and an axe. The tiger  brought  all the seven  children  
and handed  them  over  to him on,  the appointed  day. The tigress  
dissuaded  him from handing  them over to the Wrestler-cat  but 
•he refused.  The matter  ended  up in a brawl  in which  the tigress  
was bitten  on the  lip and she revenged  by hitting her  husband  on 
the head with a stick. The children  had to call on the elephant  
and the bush  pig, who  were  their  neighbours  to settle  the quarrel.
“My friend.  On the day they arrived  in the house  and locked  
up the door, he designed  beautiful  marks  on- the body of one 
of those children.  He killed  and ate one on the second  day. He 
repeated  the act on the third day. He ate some on the fourth  
day. He killed  and consumed  the meat  of all the tiger ’s children  
except  the one he had designed  marks  on.
“In the morning  of the seventh  day, he opened  the window  
and saw  the tiger  and his wife  waiting  for him  beside  the window.  
On seeing  them,  he greeted  them  warmly  but told them  to move  
a little farther  in accordance  with  the tradition  of tribal  marking.  
Hence,  if they  drew  near  the house  too much,  the mark  would  be 
spoilt.  They  were directed  to move  farther  to enable  him show  
them  the designed  marks  from  the window. ’ They  obeyed.
After  that, he carried  up the only remaining  child on the 
window  sill, showing  them.  They  became  elated  and excited  on
IREKE  ONIBXJDO


seeing  him. The tiger looked  at his wife ’s face and said, ‘You 
bad woman,  I told you,  this man loves us! ’ Wrestler-cat  brought  
down  the child in the house.  He raised  up the same child the 
second  time and said, ‘This is the second  one. ’ They became  
happy  and clapped  .their hands.  That was how he showed  one 
child  to them  seven  times.
“After this, he-told  the tiger that he must wait for seven  
minutes  before  entering  the house to check his children.  He 
moved  out and closed  the door. The tiger  thanked  him and gave  
him a lamb,  in appreciation  of his  work. He was then seen off 
to the river  bank  to board  a canoe  home.  On getting  to the river  
bank where  fishes paddled  canoes  that could take him home,  
the wicked  beast  preferred  the service  of a deaf  fish despite  the 
presence  of other ones. The action  was even surprising  to the 
tiger.
“When  -the beast  entered  the canoe, he turned his face 
backward ’towards  the tiger  and greeted  him thus: ‘Goodbye  for 
now. Go and look  at your  children.  Whatever  happens,  do not be 
troubled.  I have  been  eating  meat  for days.  My teeth  are paining  
me. I want to  go home  to give holidays  to them.  Greet your  wife  
for me. ’
“The language  was initially  ambiguous  to the tiger and 
he replied,  ‘I didn’t hear. Say it again  to enable  me hear. What  
did you say? ’ As he was saying  this. Wrestler-cat  told the deaf  
fish-sailor  to take-off.  He obeyed  and the canoe  moved  on as 
the tiger repeated  his earlier  statement  thus, ‘I say you should  
return  home;  I have been eating  meat for seven  days; my teeth  
are paining,  me; I should  go home  to give rest to them.  ’
“The tiger replied  again,  ‘Which  meat?  Repeat. ’ When  he 
wanted  to reply  again,  the canoe  had left the harbour  completely  
for the sea. He shouted  and said, ‘I said,  you fool should  go back
IREKE  ONIBUDO

home.  I have  killed  all your children.  I have  broken  their  bones  
completely.  The fat of their  buttocks  has graced  my mouth! ’
“Tiger  faintly  heard  this and ran back home.  He got there  
and met only  one child  and saw carcasses  of different  shapes  and 
sizes.  He called  on his wife  and they  ran to the harbour  together.  
When  they arrived  at the harbour  and called  on the deaf-fish  to 
sail back with Wrestler-cat,  he did not hear them well. When  
he enquired  about what they were saying  from Wrestler-cat,  
he answered,  ‘The tiger and his wife said you are not sailing  
speedily  enough  and that if you don ’t sail me quickly  to the other  
side of the river, they will murder  you today. ’ When  the tiger  
was weeping  and rolling  himself  on the ground,  the deaf-fish  
spoke  again, ‘Wrestler-cat,  my friend,  why are the^ behaving  
like this? ’ Wrestler-cat  responded  again,  ‘The tiger and his wife  
are bitterly  annoyed  that the ship is not speeding  well. They  are 
now preparing  to come and catch  you on the sea..  This means  
that you will lose your life.^ The deaf  fish then increased  the 
speed  of the boat, sailing  Wrestler-cat  to the harbour.
“When  they almost  got to the river  bank.  Wrestler-cat  said,  
‘You  this fish, I pity you.  You are, please,  advised  to increase  the 
speed  of this boat. The tiger is coming  and I won ’t want  your  
head to sleep in his bowel  tonight;  if he catches  up with you, 
you are dead.  You are not more  than  a morsel  for him.  Your  child  
would  become  fatherless  and your  wife a widow.  So, please  for
your own sake,  put in more  effort. ’
“That  was what  the animal  said. The deaf-fish  was sailing  
desperately,  the boat  was moving  speedily,  the tiger  was weeping  
on the river  bank  while  the tigress  Continued  rolling  violently  on 
the shore. Wrestler-cat  was laughing.  The louder  the mourning  
of  the bereaved  animals,  the faster  the deaf-fish.  They  soon  got to
IREKE  ONIBUDO


the shore and  he paid  for the service  of the deaf-fish.  He received  
his money,  thanked  him, and swam  to the bottom  of the sea for 
further  exploits.
“After  this. Wrestler-cat  called  on the tiger from the other  
side saying,  ‘My friend at the other riverside,  sorry for the 
painful  experience.  Why is your wife rolling  towards  the river  
bank?  If she rolls' toward  the sea, she will find herself  in the 
river.  Let me tell you something.  The meat  of your  children  was ^ 
extremely  delicious.  Your  first child  was made  my meal on the 
day before  yesterday.  Though  the bones were proving  fairly  
hard but I was able to break  it to pieces.  It was fatty but very  
palatable.  I enjoyed  best the meat of your last offspring.  The 
bones  were  quietly  breaking  in my  mouth;  I will never  forget  his 
head,  which  was well broken  by me. Goodbye  for now. I will 
come and check  your house  whenever  I experience  hunger.  If 
you haven ’t given  birth  to another  child  by then, I will hopefully  
lay my hand  on one of your  relatives.  Goodbye. ’
“When  he finished  speaking,  he left for his house  and the 
tiger returned  home with his 'wife after some moment.  The 
story of the tragic  occurrence  spread  in the midst  of the other  
animals.  The entire  young  animals  were  mocking  the tiger as a 
result  of the bad occurrence  but the elderly  ones did not. They  
consoled  him passionately  for the bereavement.  The elephant  
went  to greet  him.  The wolf  also visited  him. The lion also sent 
a condolence  message  to him. The domestic  animals  would  have  
sent a condolence  message  but when  the matter  was debated  in 
their  conference  where  the cat moved  the motion  (not Wrestler-  
cat), the sheep condemned  it but the cow seconded'  it. When  
the dog that was the chairman  said the domestic  animals  that 
supported  the motion  that a messenger  should  be sent should
IREKE  ONIBUDO,


shake  their  tails, those  who did so were  few.
“When  the tiger thought  over the wickedness  he had got 
from Wrestler-cat,  he contemplated  vengeance.  He later saw a 
deer, killed  it and took it to the king as a bribe and he  accepted  
it. He explained  to the king  the evil that befell  him and they 
deliberated  on how to catch  the animal.
“They  conspired  that the king should  sound  the going all 
over the kingdom  that he Wanted  to rebuild  his palace;  that all 
the animals  should  bring leaves  to carry out the repairs.  The 
directive  was-backed  up with a decree  that anyone  that refused  
to bring his own leaf would  be banished  from the forest.  The 
king had told the  tiger to arrive  quickly  at the' part of the bush
where  all of them  could  get the leaves.
“Wrestler-cat  heard the announcement  and knew in his 
mind  that the plan  was made  because  of him. He then  thought  of 
how to save himself  He took his wife to where  they would  get 
the leaves  in the night,  cut his own leaves  and gave a  rope to his 
wife. He entered  the bunch  of leaves and  told her to cover  him 
well  with the leaves.  She obliged. After  that, he instructed  her to 
tie it very  well with  ropes.  She obeyed.  She so much  tied it to an 
extent  that no one could  know  that someone  was  within.  Anyone 
looking  at it would  think  it was an ordinary  bunch  of leaves.
“Wrestler-cat  knew  that the tiger  would  get to the forest  first 
because  of him. He told his wife to leave  for home  after  she had
tied him perfectly.  He remained  inside  the leaves  and slept  off.
“A little while  after he woke  up in the bunch  of leaves,  he 
heard  the voice of the tiger because  he came earlier  than the 
other  animals.  When  he came,  he looked  up and down  but saw 
no one. He then spoke  aloud,  ‘The idiot  has not arrive^.  I would  
stay by this leave. I won ’t cut any leave again  to increase  my
IREKE  ONIBUDO

vigilance  for him because  I may not be able to notice  him when  
the animals  are many.  If the owner  of this bunch  of leaves  sees 
me, he won ’t be bold enough  to challenge  me. I, the fearsome  
tiger;  the circumcizer  of the forests.  I who circumcise  without  a 
razor. No  one can look down  on me among  all the beasts. ’
“That  was how  he waited  till daybreak  when-all the  animals  
came, cut their bunch  of leaves  and carried  them to the king.  
When  it remained  only  the tiger  after  the departure  of all animals  
and he did not see Wrestler-cat;  he hissed  and carried  the bunch  of 
leaves  on the ground  not knowing  that  he had carried  his enemy.  
After  he had trekked  a little.  Wrestler-cat  pulled  the hairs on his 
head but he ignorantly  said, ‘This bunch  of leaves  is pinching  
my head too much. ’ Later,  Wrestler-cat  spat on his head.  The 
tiger said, ‘The water  in the leaves  is too much. ’ Wrestler-cat  
continued-misbehaving  as he was being  carried.  He became  the 
porter  for his antagonist.  The situation  remained  the same till  
they got to the palace.  When  the king saw him and asked  about  
the whole  thing,  he answered  sorrowfully  that it all ended  in 
futility.
“When  .the wicked  beast  observed  that the tiger  had left the 
palace,  he quietly  came out of the bunch  of leaves  and retied  
it very well. He went into the king and said, ‘Your majesty,  I 
have brought  my bundle  of leaves. I  have never  seen any load 
as big as that. T  joyfully  carried  it but its pressure  on me was so 
much  that I could  not catch  up with my colleagues^  on the way. 
I so much  love you. You are our father.  You are the father  of the 
elders;  you are our father.  You are the  father  of the wild-boar;  
you are our father.  You are are the father  of the deer; you are our 
father.  You are the father  of the fox; you are our father.  You are 
the father  of the sheep;  you are our father.  You are the father  of
IREKE  ONIBUPO


the pigeon;  you are our father:  You are the father*  of the  python;  
you are our father.  You  ’are the father  of the cocks;  you are our 
father.  You are the father  of human  beings,  you are our father. ’
“That  was how Wrestler-cat  spoke  in the- front of the king.  
The king ’s ability  to gather  himself  together  for any reasonable  
action  was lost  in the prolonged  eulogy,  ‘You are our father ’ of 
the animal.  He just welcomed  him.
“My friend.  Wrestler-cat  was a wicked  beast. On getting  
home,  he refused  to lay his mouth  to rest. On the second  day’s 
morning,  he went  to^the  river  bank and called  on the tiger  who 
stood  at the other  bank,  saying:
‘Good morning  my friend.  How was yesterday ’s labour?  
Hope your neck is not paining  you? ’ The tiger then answered  
thus, ‘I thought  your  head  would  push  you to come,  yesterday.  It 
would  have been your last opportunity  to see the world. ’ After  
he had spoken.  Wrestler-cat  laughed  repeatedly and  heartily  and 
said, ‘Who failed  to come?  Who didn’t come?  I came  but you 
knew  not. You ’ve been  known  to me for long.  Didn’t I know  that 
we were all sent to the bush because  of me? Listen,  I was the 
one inside  the bundle  of leaves  that you,  carried.  You-were  my 
porter.  I was carried  home  by you. Have  you forgotten  that you 
said something  was stinging  your head when  you were almost  
crossing  a stream?  It was not a natural  occurrence.  I was the one 
pulling  your  hairs.  You also said  the leaves  were  cold  when  spat 
on your  head.  I came  out of the bundle  of leaves  to pay homage  
to the king after  you had dialogued  with him and departed. ’
“The tiger was so sorrowful  to the extent  that he couldn’t 
eat when  he got home.  When  his wife enquired  from  him about  
what  happened,  he replied,  ‘I was the one that carried  Wrestler-  
cat home  yesterday. ’ The wife  reacted,  ‘Carried  who home? ’ He 
answered  again,- ‘Carried  Wrestler-cat  home. ’ She reacted  again
IREKE  ONIBUDO

‘How? ’ He answered,  ‘He hid himself  inside  the bundle  of leaves  
I carried  yesterday  and I was not aware.  I got to  the bush,  saw a 
bundle  of leaves  and carried  it.’ The wife then responded,  ‘You 
got to the bush, saw a bundle  of leaves  and carried  it without  
knowing  its owner  and content.  He who carries  a bundle  of 
leaves  anyhow would  surely  carry  problem  with it!’
“When  the tigress  said that,  he became  more  infuriated  and 
asked,  ‘What  should  I do now? ’ The wife said, ‘You had better  
go and tell the king about it ‘so as to agree on what to do to 
Wrestler-cat.  I am depressed. ’
“The tiger accepted  the counsel  of his wife. On the second,  
day, he went  to tell the king. The king was highly  surprised  by 
the story. He said, ‘This beast is bent on destroying  you. You 
have  to be prepared.  Let me see you next tomorrow. ’-
“On the next day ’s morning,  the tiger killed  two deers and . 
sent them  to him to arouse  his interest  the more.
“On the third  day, he went  to the king as earlier  agreed  and 
they planned  on What they would  do to catch the beast. They  
conspired  that a banquet  to which  all animals  would  be invited  
should  be organized  for Wrestler-cat  to demonstrate  the love  that 
the king had for him. •'That would  be the best way to capture  
Wrestler-cat  because  he is in the first place  a lover  of food; and 
in the second  place, it would  be a mark of disrespect  for any 
invited  guest to disregard  The king ’s banquet  despite  the fact 
that attendance  was not compulsory.  In accordance  with these  
agreements,  the whole  amount  to be spent  for the banquet  would  
be provided  by the tiger.  In a nutshell,  the king announced  with  
his gong that all the animals  should  come  for a banquet  in his 
palace  in nine days ’ time.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

“After That, he chose  two commissioned  traditional  police ­
men, two respectable  palace  women,  two palace  messengers,  
two servants  and two chiefs  held in high esteem  in the animal  
kingdom.  These  people  were sent to the house  of Wrestler-cat  
to deliver  his goodwill  message  and tell him that 'he should,  
not be smprised.by  the status  of those sent. They  were sent to 
demonstrate  the king ’s great  love for him  and make  him a  trusted  
close  friend  who would  be!  free to seeing  day: and night  and to 
transform  him to" a respectable  fellow  in the animal  kingdom.
“When  the messengers  got to his place,  he did not behave as 
if he was aware  of their  thoughts.  He entertained  them  lavishly  
and gave  them  a warm  reception.  He therefore  sent a message  to 
the king to be expecting  him.in  a gorgeous  dress  bn the banquet  
day - he and his family  members.
“Without  wasting  time.  Wrestler-cat  went  to look  for twelve  
big rats. He gave them money  and food and employed  them  
for ground  digging.  The ground  according  to him should  be 
dug from his house  to the king ’s room  within  the palace.  They  
quickly  started  the Job while  he went to the bush birds to get 
various  feathers.
“At dawn  .on the banquet  day, he woke  his wife up, rubbed  
his body with a strange sap  and instructed  her to decorate  his 
body  with feathers.  His whole  body  was covered  except  the face  
and legs. He used white  chalk  and ocre to design  his face and 
legs before  wearing  a pair of silvery  shoes.  Nobody,  who knew  
him before,  could  suspect  his personality  on that day.
“That was what the beast did. When He observed,  that 
several  animals  had gathered  in the banquet  venue,  he entered  
the burrowed  hole and proceeded  to the palace.  He got to the 
king ’s room  when  the animals  were  about  to start  eating.  Having
IREKE.ONIBUDO

discovered  that everyone  was already  jn the courtyard  thereby  
making  the rooms  empty,  he shouted-thus:
‘ A-a-a-a-11  the pe-e-e-o-o-ple  o-o-f  the wor-or-or-or-ld!
A-a-a-a-11  the pe-e-e^-o-ple  i-i-n the wor-or-or-or-ld!  The 
Kin-in-in-g ’s fa-a-a-ther  ha-a-as  co-o-o-me  ,fro-o-o-m  hea-ea-  
ea-ven-en-eri!  ’ When  ''^restler-cat  shouted  from the room, all 
the animals  remained  very quiet. He* quickly  opened  the-door,  
and when  they saw him and wanted  to take  to their  heels,  he told 
them to wait, saying  he was the father  of the king and that he 
felt so happy  to see his child  feasting  in the world.  This he said 
further  motivated  him to come from heaven.  He was speaking  
through  his nose like a masquerade  and no one could  think  he 
wasn’t the king ’s father.
“There,  was a spontaneous,  reaction  from the animals  who 
started  dancing  round  Wrestler-cat  on seeing  him dance.  Those  
who shared ,from the king ’s father ’s smiles on that day felt 
highly  honoured.  The elephant  danced  till he fell trees;  the tiger  
danced  till he crushed  two animals  with his feet; the monkey  
somersaulted  till he sustained  head injury;  the deer danced  till 
he broke  his horns. The king  felt highly  elated  that his father  had 
come  from  heaven  to visit  him.
“After sometime,  Wrestler-cat  asked for food. The king  
quickly  commanded  that he should  be served  the portion  of the 
prepared  meals,  Wrestler-cat  then  instructed  the tiger to feed 
him. He felt highly  impressed  by the gesture  because  it is an 
honourable  thing  to feed the king ’s father..  Some  moments  later,  
Wrestler-caf  told him to cut his fingernails  which  were  pinching  
his ihouth  saying,  ‘Go and cut your  long  nails. ’ The tiger  quickly  
obeyed.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

“When  this fake  king ’s father  finished  eating,  he commended  
the tiger in the presence  of his colleagues  for feeding  him well  
He spoke  further  that he would  do a medicine  for him in their  
presence  as a reward  for the commendable  work  done  by him.  The 
tiger  was told to spread  his palms  on the ground  and he obeyed.  
Having  done  that,  Wrestler-cat  passed  excreta  on them  and said,
‘This is a precious  thing;  the excreta  of the heavenly  being;  use 
it to rub your head. The tiger  joyfully  obeyed.  He rubbed  his
Ahead with the excreta  of Wrestler-cat.  His head became  dirty  
and started  smelling-like  an eight-day  old soup. He became  the 
carrier  of another  man ’s excreta  and his head  became  an abode  
for several  houseflies.  Sometimes,  he would  forget  about the 
problem  on his head  and touch  his head,  thereby  having  his hand  
rubbed  with excreta;  he was smelling  from head to toe. The 
worst  of all the string  of ill-treatments  was that Wrestler-cat  spat 
on his hand and said he should  rub his face with it and lick it. 
He obeyed. After  that, he instructed ’him to turn his head  to him 
to enable  him'  blow  his mucus  on it. He coughed  and he blew  
mucus on his head.  My friend,  imagine  how wicked  the animal  
was. He defecated  on anther person,  spat on his hand,  and blew  
mucus  on his head.
“The tiger accepted  all these wrongs  joyfully  because  he 
felt honoured  by the king ’s father.  In a nutshell,  that was how 
Wrestler-cat  treated  the tiger  till dusk  when  he bade  the animals  
farewell  and blessed  all of them.  He entered  the room  and got 
inside  the hole  after  eating  to his satisfaction.
“In the morning  of the second  day. Wrestler-cat  had his bath,  
dressed  well and went  to stand  on the bank  of the river  bordering  
his house and the tiger ’s. He called on him saying, ‘Good  
morning  my fiiend,  hope  you really  enjoyed yesterday,  how was
IREKE  ONIBUDO

the whole  thing? ’ When  he had said this, the tiger  replied  saying,  
‘You fool. Who are you talking  to? Your sins are pursuing  you 
about„  The sins pursued  and prevented  you from coming  to 
witness  the enviable  occasion  of yesterday.  Go and ask from all 
the animals.  They  will  tell you  what  happened  yesterday.  I maybe  
nothing  to you but I am a respectable  person  in the midst  of other  
animals.  You should  know  that I am respected  by both worldly  
and heavenly  creatures.  Ask from any of the animals  and you 
will be told th^t the king ’s father  came  from  heaven  yesterday.  
None  of those  that attended  the occasion  was more  honourably  
treated  than  me by the king ’s father  yesterday.  Observe  my head;  
the charm  I rubbed  on it yesterday  is still there.  It was given  to 
me by him. Even,  the king did not receive  from  it. I’m sorry  for 
you. Wrestler-cat.  Your  wickedness  is pursuing  you about  and 
depriving  you of some valuable  things.  But still, you are just 
running  about.  I will lay my hands  on you one day and conquer  
you. ’
“That was how the tiger spoke  to Wrestler-cat.  My friend.  
Wrestler-cat  gave him a reply that injected  a great sadness  
in him. He brought  out the feathers,  raised  them up and said,  
‘Tiger!  Tiger!  Tiger!  I’m sorry for you. You don ’t know  that a 
person  that can’t be overcome  should  be left for God to judge.  
You are pursuing  me because  I am small.  You do not know  that 
just as the hand of a little child can’t reach  the shelf, likewise  
an old man ’s hand can’t enter a gourd.  There  was, nothing  like 
king ’s father.  Wrestler-cat  was the king ’s father.  Look, these  
are the feathers  I used yesterday  to cover  myself.  These  are the 
white  chalk  and ochre  that I used to rub my hands  and feet.  I 
was the one that defecated  on your  head.  I was the one that spat 
in your hand and I was the one that blew mucus  on your head.  
These-are  the silvery  shoes  that I wore  while  dancing  yesterday.
IREKE  DNIBUDO

I was the one that sat and told you to feed me. I was the one that 
told you to go and cut your fingernails.  So, tiger, you ’ve really  
suffered.  Go and tell your  wife the punishment  I gave  you after  
consuming  your  children.  your  head  extricate  you from  this 
trouble  - the trouble  of day and night and all the unpleasant  
machination.  You should  know  that you can do nothing  to me.  I 
will surely  conquer  you. ’
“When  he finished  speaking,  he jumped  up and laughed 
heavily  saying,   Wrestler-cat  that covered  tiger ’s head corftp-  
letel5^  with excrement. ’ That was how the beast mocked  him.  
The tiger thought  sadly on the occurrence  for a moment  arid 
started  weeping.  He wept till he got home.  When  he got home  
and his wife saw him weeping,  she enquired  about  the cause  
but he refused  to tell her. When  he then opened  up, he 
answered  peevishly  thus, ‘My wife; Wrestler-cat  has rubbed  
my head with excrement. ’ His wife then said, ‘You said-what? ’ 
He once again responded,  ‘I said the Wrestler-cat  rubbed  my 
head with excrement. ’ The wife questioned  again, ‘Wrestler-  
cat rubbed  your  head  with ’excrement? ’ The tiger  kept mute  as a 
result. of  worries.  The wife then clapped  her hands  and laughed  
sarcastically,  ‘Why excrement?  Did he want to kill you? ’ She 
then shouted,  ‘Come  to my aid o. Wrestler-cat  has rubbed  my 
husband ’s head ’with excrement!  ’
“The wife shouted  and advised  her husband  to go and 
quickly  report  the matter  to the king so as to agree  on-what  to 
do to Wrestler-cat  without  wasting  time. He rose up and headed  
for the palace.  On getting  there,  he related  the whole  thing  to the 
king. The king laughed  spontaneously.  When  he observed  his 
occiput,  he noticed  some  remnant  of the feces  despite  the fact 
that the tiger  had tried to clean it off. The king asked,  ‘Is this
IREKE  ONIBUDO

not part of the shit? ’ He replied,  ‘I have  rubbed  my head against  
trees for hours  and it is now aching  me. ’
“After  thinking  deeply  for some  moment,  the king  concluded  
on how to eliminate  Wrestler-cat,  thinking  his actions  were so
infuriating.  In the first instance,  it was an act of insubordination

to the king  himself.  He was invited  to a king ’s banquet  and failed  
to come,  and the king prostrated  for him  , on the-banquet  day 
with the thought that  he was his real father.  The matter  was too 
serious.  They  were  really  being  oppressed  by the beast.
“Them  conspiracy  was that the king  should  feign  ignorance  
of the occurrence  and invite  Wrestler-cat  to his palace.  After  
obeying  the call, he should  put the tiger,  inside  a sack  and give it 
to him to wash.
“In accordance  with the' conspiracy,  the king invited  
Wrestler-cat  and gave him the sack with the instruction  that it 
should  be cleanly  washed  in the stream.  He accepted  it joyfully  
and he enthusiastically  told the king  that he would  quickly  wash  
it. He then dashed  off.
“He knew that the tiger was in it before  accepting  it. On 
moving  out, he found  a rope and used it to tie the mouth  of 
the sack to the extent  that the tiger  would  not be able' to escape  
unless  he was untied.  He then continued  his journey  with the 
sack containing  the tiger. After  trekking  for a while,  he saw a 
blacksmith ’s workshop  and he branched  there.  He carefully  used  
his hand  to locate  the tiger ’s head in the sack. Having  found  it, 
he implored  the blacksmith  to give  him the big hammer.  He then 
mustered  all his energy  and raised  it up and crushed  the tiger ’s 
head with it. That was how the tiger lost his consciousness and  
died.
IREKE  ONIBUDO


“He then took the sack to the stream,  washed  it and took it 
back to thq king. The king received  it shamefully  and fearfully  
because  his conspiratorial  act had leaked. He was further  
frightened  by the-silence  of Wrestler-Cat.  He was not bold  
enough  to ask him of the tiger ’s whereabout.  He went in and 
Wrestler-cat  headed  home.
“When  he got home,  he made fire, roasted  the tiger, cut 
him to pieces  and instructed  his wife to cook the meat in their  
cooking  pot. It was  well-cooked.  He became  very happy  on 
seeing  the tiger ’s meat  inside  the pot. He dressed  up and strolled  
to the dog ’s smithery  where  he beat the tiger  to death.
“He saw the dog blowing  fire with bellows  when he got 
to the smithery.  He volunteered  to help him blow it. The dog 
thanked  him and gave him the bellows.  He started  using the 
bellows  to make communicative  sound  thus, ‘The pot of tiger  
meat is at home  full to the brim. ’ The dog was able to-translate  
the communication  sound  of the bellows.  A little  while  later,  the 
dog quickly  stood  up and said he wanted  to go to the backyard.  
He did not do so but he went  straight  to the house  of  Wrestler-cat.  
When  he got there,  he saw his wife and told her, ‘Your  husband  
sent me to bring the pot of tiger meat prepared  by you. ’ This  
was highly  surprising  to his wife but she gave  it to him with  the 
belief  that her husband  must  have  sent him because  he (the dog)  
was not in the picture.
“Immediately  the meat pot was collected  by him, he went  
straight  to his own house,  ate as much,  as he could  and poured  
the remaining  pieces  in his own pot before  sending  an empty  
pot to Wrestler-cat ’s-wife.  He went  back  to the smithery.  He met 
Wrestler-cat  where  he was still communicating  with the bellows  
that, ‘The tiger meat pot at home  is full to the brim, is full to
IREKE  ONIBUDD

the brim,  is full to the brim. ’ He greeted  him and got hold of the 
iron-shaping  tool beating  it against  the anvil.  He later collected  
the bellows  from  Wrestler-cat  and communicated  thus, ‘I ate all, 
1 -ate all. Everything,  everything,  everything  I ate all, I ate all, 
everything,^^everything,  everything,  everything. ’
“When  the beast  heard  the communication  from  the bellows,  
he suspected  foul  play  and stood  up saying  he wanted  to get home.  
On getting  home  he called  his wife and said, ‘Where  is my pot of 
tiger  meat  'His question  baffled  her. She replied,  ‘Were  you not 
the one that sent  the dog here  to collect  it? You did not even  think  
I should  eat from  it. Do I know  the discussion  that led you to the 
tiger  meat  pot? ’ The response  changed  his countenance ’swiftly  
because  he was a voracious  animal.  Because  he could  not report  
the case  to the king,  he went  to the court  of animals.  Fox was the 
chief  judge  for he is one ‘of the animals  endowed  with wisdom.  
He took  his seat before  his subordinates.  His subordinates  were  
Justice.  Elephant,  Justice  Wild-boar,  Justice  Reindeer,  Justice  
Chimpanzee,  Justice  Giraffe,  Justice  Buffalo,  and Justice  Wolf. 
The wolf  was the deputy  to fox because  they were related.  All 
these  animal-judges  knew  well who Wrestler-cat  was.
“They  could  not listen  to his case when  he got to the court  
because  they were handling  a sensitive  case. The Brown-  
Monkey  was the accused.  He was  -the headmaster  of the college  
of animals.  He was lecturing  the jackal on the methods  of 
discovering  a trap set under  a plantain  tree but the jackal  was 
slow  in understanding.  He hit him in the stomach  and  he started  
passing  put bloody  feces  which  culminated  in his death
“The relatives^  of jackal  then filed a suit against  Monkey.  
The Case was very sensitive.  Animals  always  hired  the services'  
of birds as their lawyers  whenever  they had cases because
IREKE  ONIBUDO

birds are eloquent.  The .monkey  was to be ‘represented-  in the 
court  by Barrister  Binary  Bird but he could  not attend  the court  
session  due to some  domestic  problems.  He sent Barrister-Dove  
to stand in for him. The case was-spoilt  by dove-  as a result  of 
his gentleness.  He spoke incoherently,-  pronouncing  one word  
two hundred  and eighty  thousand  times.  The monkey  lost the 
case. He was sentenced  to life imprisonment  and condemned  
to continue  climbing  trees throughout-his  lifetime  together  with  
his children.  The monkey  has since  then  become  a tree-climbing'  
animal ’
“They heard Wrestler-cat ’s case after finishing  the 
Monkey. ’s; When  he explained  the matter,  he failed  to say that 
the dog ate his tiger  meat.  He just laid emphasis  on the statement  
tha he  stole  and ate his  meat.  If he had mentioned  tiger ’s name,  
he would  have been killed  instantly  due to the position  of the 
tiger  as -a high chief  amongst  the animals.
“When  Wrestler-cat  ended  his explanation,! they sent for 
the dog to come  and explain  why  he should  steal. Before  the 
messenger  got to his house,  he had  laid down  beside  the fire  
stand,  rubbed  himself  with oil and put two uncooked  eggs in 
his modth..  After,  they had delivered  the message  to him, he 
responded  'that he had been sick for the past three months,  
meaning  that he had not Set his  eyes on Wrestler-cat  since  then.  
The law enforcement  agent  said he must follow,  them.  The dog 
 then  followed  them  walking  with  the aid of a walking  stick.
“The animals  were-  surprised  when he appeared.  He said,  
T have been suffering  from cholera  for the past three months. ’ 
He used his teeth  to break  one of the eggs after speaking  and 
vomited  it to the-ground.  All . the animals  there thought  it was 
puke.;  The case-was  judged  and Wrestler-cat  was condemned  to 
death.  He was clubbed  to death.

IREKE ONIBUDO


“That was how they killed,  Wrestler-cat.  The measure  
he used for someone  was used for him. His meat was -shared 
amongst  the animals.
“My friend,  I think  the narration  I have  made  is enough  for 
tonight.  I want to go and sleep. I’ve also noticed  that you are 
feeling  sleepy.  Good  night.  May  we meet  peacefully  tomorrow. ”
After  his last statement  of greeting,  ireke  Onibudo  stood  up 
and entered  'the room officially  given  to him in our house  and 
locked  his door. I also entered  to join my wife and we slept  off.



Chapter  3
The Second  Day Meeting  with  
ireke  Onibudo
I woke up late on the morning  of second  day, my wife had 
earlier  woken  up and food was almost  ready.  As I woke  up and 
peeped  out from  my room,  the first  person  seen  by me was ireke  
Onibudo.  He greeted,  “Good  morning  my friend. ” I responded,  
“Good  morning,  hope  you woke  up fine?  You are welcome  fi-om  
yesterday ’s journey. ”
After that, I stood up and moved  out. I got hold of my 
chewing  stick  and started  cleaning  my teeth.  As I was doing  this, 
he said, “Be prepared,  be prepared,  my friend. Time  is going. ” 
I did not know  he was talking  to me initially  until he faced  me 
again  and said, “My friend! ” I then reacted,  “Are you talking  to 
me? Please,  be patient  for some  moment  I have  just started  using  
my chewing  stick. I will take my bath thereafter  and then you 
and I shall enter  to eat before  starting  today ’s work. ”
With that,  he did not answer  me again.  He entered  his room  
and started  discussing  with  his servants.  After  taking  my bath, I 
called  on him for breakfast.  When  we finished  eating, i entered  my room and called  him to sit with me. After sitting  down",  
he instructed  me to get hold of my writing  materials.  Having  
obliged,  I told him I was ready  and he opened  up thus:
“My friend,  thank you for your hospitality  to me since  
yesterday.  You are a man; you are a good man. A good  spirit  is 
within  you;  the spirit  of development  and importance  that makes
IREKE  ONIBUDO

one ’s life elegant.  'I’m gratfe ful  to you: I’m so grateful  to your  
wife.  She took  care of  us - my servant and  I. You  must  have  been  
surprised  when  I woke  up this morning  and started  hurrying  you 
up.  J wouldn't have  hope  that if the work  I wanted  you to do is of 
little importance.  I was sent to you to enable  you tell the whole  
world  what  I would  tell you. You should  not add to it. Let it be 
delivered  as you are told.

“I am Ireke  Onibudo.  The one that saw you when  you were  
young.  The wretched  man that stood  beside  that white-clothed  
man called  Adeorun,  one of God ’s creatures  residing  in heaven.I am a human  being  but I have been  taught  heaven ’s wisdom  
by Heaven-crown.  My eyes have seen numerous  things  in the 
world.  I would  tell you for the sake of the future  to enable  the 
human  race know that the world is full of various  things.  It 
is full of thorny  woods  and deep gorges,-  high mountains  and 
thick forests.  It is also full of several  ways that God can use to 
condemn  and commend  human  beings,  I, ireke Onibudo,  have  
travelled  wide.  I have  toured  so many  places.  I got to the City  of 
Deads  where  Ilepa  was their  king. I toured  to the settlement  of the fishes  where  I was captured  by the Mermaid.  All this I  would  
tell you today.  _ „ '
“When  you saw me with Adeorun  in those days, I had crossed  to the stage of adulthood.  I Was then in a problem  so great  that no one could  want  his child  to be. I was-so  poor;.!  was 
left with only a penny  in my pocket  at that time.
“My name is Ireke Onibudo.  My father ’s name  ^as ireke  
Aye. People  called  him so because  his life was at a time as sweet  
as sugarcane  when  he was alive.  He had twenty-two  wives  and 
thirty  children.  I was the firstborn of my father  and of course  the ' 
first son. My mother  was the eldest  of all his wives.  The end of
IREKE  ONIBUDO ___________

my father  was not good.  His life wouldn’t have  been  so if he had 
respected  the pieces  of advice  from  my mother.  Numerous  wives  
transformed  to numerous  problems.  My father  did not allow  my 
mother  to know  all the other-wives  he married  until  they  packed  
to the house except  the two that came after her. When  these  
numerous  women  came into his house,  he kept my mother  out 
of all his decisions.  Their  arrival  at my father ’s house brought  
antagonism  between him and my mother.  He sought  advice  from  
the younger  wives  on issues, rather  than  getting  in touch  with  my 
mother.
“He later married  a wealthy  man ’s daughter.  She told my 
father that her father  wanted  to form a business  association  
which  she would  want him to join;' this made him happy.  He 
wanted  to become  a famous  wealthy  man. He gathered  the whole  
money  he had and handed  it over to her for onward  transfer  to 
her father.  He even  borrowed  ^ore.  They  bought  various  goods  
and conveyed  them  to a foreign  land  but they  got spoilt  along  the 
^ay. Things  became  so bad for my father.  He was so indebted  
and found  it difficult  to feed himself
“The worst  occurrence  was that he carried  all my mother ’s 
property  and sold them  to pay off the incurred  debt, but it was 
not totally  settled.  The wife he planned  the business  with later  
divorced  him.  All the other  wives  were  divorcing  him one  by one 
until only my mother  remained  in his house.  He was eventually  
knocked  down  by an ailment  that claimed  his life. My mother  
and ,I were left with nothing.  All my younger  stepbrothers  and 
stepsisters  left our house.  My mother  later fell sick. I took care 
of her to the best of my ability  but the sickness  soon became  
more  serious.
“One morning,  she called  me -and made her valediction  
saying,  ‘My child,  Ireke  Onibudo.  I have observed  I will surely
IREKE  ONIBUDO

die of this ailment.  Though,  I have nothing  to.bequeath  to you 
but I commit  you to the hand of God.- On my death,  leave  the 
town  and make  a journey  to a place  of your choice.  Your  father  
has sold all I have  -and left me naked  in the world.  My life- has 
been spoilt.  I .was not-bad  to anyone.  I was not wicked  to my 
neighbour.  o,  God,-  make my departure  good. Help me to 
guide  ireke  Onibuo on his  journey  through  the world.  Do not let 
him die  painful  death  like me.. If this child  encounters  problem  
in the world,  rescue  him God. If he come§  into contact  with  
tribulations,  God,  rescue  him. If he finds  himself  in a problem  of 
poverty,  God, rescue  him. ’
“That-was  my-mother ’s valedictory  speech.  After  she had 
finished,  she said* I should  come and carry her on my .arms; 
which  I did. On  placing  her .on my arms,  she breathed  her last.
I wrapped  her corpse  with the only cloth  on her when  she gave  
up the ghost.  I was unable  to invite  my age mates  to come  and 
assist  me dig  her grave  because  I could  not entertain  them.  I took  
a hoe and dug her grave  alone  in the great  sorrow  that her death  
brought  me.
“My condition  was so bad because  none of my. father ’s 
relatives  was rich. Most  of them  were dead. Her elder  brother  
who was still alive was so old that he had lost his. sight. No 
single  tooth  was left in his mouth  and rheumatism  had made  him 
a lame.  His end was around  the comer.
i
“My explanation  would  have  shown  you that I was really  in 
a bad state  when  my mother  passed  on. The only  thing  possessed  - 
by me was the trousers  inherited  from  my father  and the raged  
garment  I wore. That was the one you saw on me when  I was 
with  Adeorun.  I also had a penny  in my  pocket.  I left the town - and headed  towards  the forest  for seven  days feeding  on fruits.  ,
IREKE  ONIBUDO

I became  tired of living  and preferred  being  devoured  by a wild  
beast.  Those  dwarfs  also captured  me after I had wandered  for 
sometime  and took  me to Adeorun.  I then decided  to be moving  about  in his company  till I could  get someone  to put up with.  But 
things  have changed  now; God has saved  me. Adeorun  was the one that told me to come  and tell you my life history.
“When  I was with  the man  the other  time  before  you  joined  
us, what he said was, Ireke  Onibudo,  you have nobody  today  
but yet yo have someone.  You have God who will continue  to 
support  you. There  is problem  before  you; dangerous  things  as 
hard  as stones  are awaiting  you. But do you know  that a man  that 
can’t face  problems  bravely  and conquer  it is less important  than 
an ordinary  fowl in this world?  Tighten  your  belt. Continue  to 
march  on and your  life will be as precious  as gold and diamond.  
After  climbing  your  problematic  mountains  to the peak,  a day is. 
coming  when  numerous  people  will want to have what  you ’ve 
got but you should  not forget your God where you become  
successful. ’
“When he finished  speaking,  I became  terrified  arid 
answered  thus, ‘Please,  .friend,  tell me who you are, where  you 
are from  and where  you are heading  to.’
“He then responded  thus, ‘I knew you before  you knew  
me. I have been observing-  you for a very long time. I had the 
knowledge  of your father ’s death.  Your  mother ’s sickness  was 
not hidden  from  my eyes. I am one of the heavenly  spirits  that 
are not visible  to human  beings.  I walk  round  the world  twenty-  
four times daily to document  man ’s behaviour  in the hook of 
remembrance*  Some have ten bad deeds and five good ones  
recorded  for them  while  some  have twenty-four  bad deeds  and 
no good deed recorded  for them.  All these appear  in that book
IREKE  ONIBUDO

for their  judgement. But, Ireke Onibudo,  my joy is that your  
good deeds outnumber  your bad deeds in the world;  likewise  
your  mother ’s.’
“Having  said that, I replied,  Adeorun,  the famous  spirit  of heaven,  if your words  that the benevolence  of my mother  outnumbered  her, malevolence  is me, why then was she so 
penurious  that she died  without  anything? ’
“My question  made  him laugh.  He answered  thus, ‘God is 
the custodian  of death.  It’s neither  imyour  hand  or mine.  He acts 
as He wishes.  What  is clearly  visible  to Him remains  unseen  by 
men.  Ahyone  He removes  from  the surface  of the heart  remains  
removed.  That act is one of the occmxences  that can’t ever be 
comprehended  by men  of the World. ’
“My friend,  that was the end of our dialogue  before  those  
extremely  short  creatures  brought  you to me. You would  notice  
that he said nothing  again  when  you arrived  and that you and I 
left the forest  and walked  together  before  you branched  to your  
farm  and I moved  yonder,  ^o, many  mysterious  things  had been  
experienced  by me since  we parted.
“Later, after our parting,  I got to the farm of a man and 
branched  there.  His hut was built beside  the bush-path.'  He was 
busy  preparing  food when  I arrived  there. I told him to let me 
help him grind  the pepper  he was grinding  and he agreed..  After  
that, I asked  whether  he had any other  work  I could  do for him.
I '
He responded  that he only wanted  to prepare  food. So,  I should  
not mind.  He added  that I could  go if I wanted.
“I then told him that I had an important  matter  to discuss  
with him. Having  given  the request  a positive  reaction,  I went 
further  to speak  out. I told him that I was interested  in serving  
under  him and that if some pieces  of work were available  on
IREKE  ONIBUDO

his farm, I would  be prepared  to do it-for him. He responded  
joyfully  that there  were  and even spoke  further  that all his recent  
trials to get labourer's  ended  in vain, he then saw me as' a God-  
sent.,
“That  was how I  started  working  on his farm.  On the second  
day, I observed  that he had a hen that was nursing  chicks  and I 
begged  him whether  he could  allow  me nurse  them for him so 
that we could  share  them  equally  when  they  grew  up. He refused  
but said he could  only allow  ipe' to buy one of them.  The chicks  
were  too young  - about  three-day  old. I enquired  about  the price  
and he, said each one was a peimy.  I eventually  bought  one of 
them  for a penny  which  was,  all I had in my pocket.-
“That was how I put up with him.> The chick I bought  
survived,  growing  up. I was saving  my wages  because  he was 
responsible  for my feeding.  When  it was exaetly  a year,  my small  
chick rnatured,  laid and hatched  eight eggsseven  iiens and 
a coek. Surprisingly,  they survived.  By the following  year,  
each of the hens had laid,  eggs..  Each-laid  eight eggs.  All their  
offsprings  survived.  Gradually,  I becarne  the owner  of fowls.-1 
had up to three  hundred  of them  before  I started  selling  them  to 
people.  My first  proceed  was ten pounds.
“My master  liked me as his heart and I kept him abreast  
of my actions.  He knew  whaf  I was worth  in money.  He later  
advised  me to becpme-^an  independent  farmer  and jettison  paid 
labour.  He gave me a piece  of farm and I was very grateful  to 
him. His hospitality  was so much  apprecia:ted  by tne to the pxtent  
that I always  thought  on how to reciprocate.  We always  hosted  
his guests jointly.  I looked  for herbs  whenever  he fell ill; I never  
left him alone  when  he had problems.
“He had only one wife when I arrived  in his house. The 
second  one was married  when  I got there.  We were  separated  by
IREKE  ONIBUDO
the .second  wife. It happened  thus: The woman  had superficial  
love for her husband.  She behaved  like a queen  before  other  
men. I was usually  sent to her when she was a spinster  and I 
offered  her things  when  I had. Rather  than for her to love my 
master  whole-heartedly,  she directed  the love towards  me and 
did several  things  to entice  me. She talked  badly  to me about  
my master,  saying  that I was morally  better  and more  handsome  
than him. That she had my love within  her; she dreamt  of me; 
her heart was always  with me. Whenever  she, discovered  that 
I bought  an attire, she would  buy the type. If she learnt  I was 
planning  to .go somewhere,  she would  also want to go there.  
Whenever, I  went  to my hometown,  she would  be there  to greet  
and send prepared  food to me. She always  smiled  at me. If I 
sat somewhere,  her gaze would  be fixed on me. She returned  
my unpleasant  facial  reactions  with smiles.  She was one of the 
malevolent  and stupid  people  whose  hearts  the devil has made  
his palace,  wearing  his crown  on his head,  sitting  on his throne,  
engaging  themselves  in underground  deceits.
“She conceived  hatred  for me when I refused  to respond  
favourably  to her secret  love  moves.  I was like shit to her, hated  
from  head  to toe.
“She went further  to malign  me on getting  into my master ’s 
house.  He acted  like one of the men that are ignorant  of the tacit 
destructive  behaviour  of women.  One morning,  he called  me 
qnd said I should  leave his hut. I asked  him the reason  for his 
action but  he refused  to tell me. That was how I left the  place . 
but the woman  divorced  him three months  after my departure
because  God must  have seen that I did no evil to  him.
“I had some  amount  of  money  before  I left his farm.  A friend  
of mine and I then planned  to .go and trade for sometime  in a
foreign  town. We purchased  various  articles  and packaged  them.  
We then agreed  to' carry it to a town called  Backward  People.  
We were  just hearing  of the town ’s name  but we had never  been  
there.  A hunting  bush-path  led to it.
“My friend  and I woke  up early  in the morning,  carried  our 
loads and set out for our journey  through  a forest.  At exactly  
twelve  o’clock  in the afternoon,  we got to a stream and put down  
our loads  to drink  water. ’A3 we were  doing  that, a loud  voice  was 
suddenly  heard  by us from the  upper  part of the stream  saying,  
‘Fo-re-st  ow-ner  0000  !-!-! The Fo-re-st  ow-ner  000 o!-!-  
! Human  beings ! -! -! Hu-man  be-ings !-!-! ’ That was what the 
creature  said and we knew  it was a goblin. We quickly  dispersed  
-1 climbed  a tree but my  friend  ran elsewhere.
“The voice continued  moving  towards  me. I later saw all 
the animals  running^  helter-skelter.  After  that, I saw the goblin.  
His hip Was covered  with palm-fronds.  It was so much  that it 
kept his waist out*  of-view  completely.  He had an eye on his 
forehead  and one on his occiput.  His nails are like lion ’s and he 
used  chalk  powder  and ochre to  design  his face. The face was as 
fearsome,  as the shrine  walls.
“On getting  to where  I was, he did not look up but he had 
seen  me. He said, T have  seen  you;  you human  being.  I have  seen  
you, wicked  creature  of the world.  Come  down,  come  down  and 
meet death.  Remain  seated  there and let death  come and meet  
you. Your  head  will be a guest  to my pot of soup today. ’ After  
saying  this, he put his back  on the tree and on and the branch  I 
sat on carried  me to him. He captured  me and put a rope around  
my neck,  pulling  me as I followed  him. After  a while,  he took  
me to a rocky  den. When  he got to the entrance  of it, he knocked  
as if somebody  inside  would  open for him but the rocky  door
IREKE QNIBUDO

opened  naturally.  I became  aware  of the large size of the rocky  
den when  I entered  it. It-contained  so many  rooms.  He took me 
inside  one of the rooms  there and locked  me up. I saw the inner  
parts  of the room  clearly  because  it had windows.  When  I looked  
up, I saw numerous  iron rods on the wall holding  several  human  
skulls.
“He went  out shouting  after locking  up the rooms-both  the 
one I was and others.  When  he had gone out for walking  and 
ranting  spree,  I observed  the room  well and saw a lot of golden  
currency  there  but I was far away  from  joy because  of the death  
awaiting  me.
“I meditated  to God before  his arrival  saying,  ‘My creator,  
my creator,  you are my creator.  Why  does my life look  like this?  
My lifetime  has been  full of sorrow  for years.  My creator,  do not 
let it end in sadness.  My lifetime  has never  been beneficial  to 
me, my creator,  d not let me-die  without  joy. My life is bitter,  
my creator,  let it be sweet.  My life is dirty, let it be clean like 
a spring.  I am in  trouble,  my creator,  bring me comfort.  I am 
full of anxiety,  my creator,  bring  me calmness  of mind.  I have  
no relative;  stand  as my relative.  Free me from  the hand of this 
wicked  spirit and let me make a story out of this occurrence.  
Rescue  me, my creator,  rescue  me from unexpected  sorrow,  
rescue  me, creator  rescue  me. From  the hand  of cannibal-spirit,  
rescue  me, creator,  rescue  me'. ’
“That was how I meditated  to God and left myself  to his 
mercy.  When  I observed  the room  very well, I saw an iron  rod 
with a pointed  tip and I examined  it closely  whether  I could  use 
it to stab the spirit  in the eyes.  I developed  cold  feet  when  I heard  
him coming  back,  shouting.  He came  back  with  the corpse  of my 
friend  and ate it in my presence.  He laid down  and slept  off after  
his meal.
IREKE  ONIBUDO


“I heard  him snoring  where  he-slept  and  observed  that all 
the doors  were  opened.  I quietly  opened  the door  and I removed  
the rope on-my  neck/I  got hold  of the pointed-iron  in his room  
and mustered  all the power-within  me to Stab his eye with it. He 
stood  up and started  looking  for me with the eye on his occiput  
but I remained  unseen  by him. I quietly  crawled  out of the rock  
as he cried  about  painfully.
“It was getting  dark before  I found  my way out but the 
moonlight-made  it look like daytime.  I lost my belongings  but 
I was unworried  because  I carried  out some of his-gold.  I did  
not know  the way to Ero-ehin  town  very  well because  it was an hunting  route. I couldn ’t arrive  there the next day. I got there  
after  some  days.
“On the third day, I got to a mysterious  town. When I 
entered*  it, no one was seen by me yet I heard people  talking  
to each other. I was hearing  the sound of footsteps  and that 
of business  transactions.  As I kept on prowling  about,  I saw-  a 
palatial  mansion  .and entered  jt. On entering,  I saw a man sitting  
on a high throne;  I greeted  him hut tears were  rolling  down  his 
face as he wanted  to cry.
“After  wiping of the  tears,  he said, ‘The son of man, ‘you are  ini
the city  of the-deads.  The name  of this settlement  is Irewesi.  I am 
Ilepa,  the king of this place.  I am one of the heavenly  creatures  but the world  has become  a temporary  place for human  beings  
since they double  dealt Qod in the beginning.  God has since  
then  put me in this,  town  of Irewesi  to take care of the dead  that are about leaving  the world  for heaven.  They must not spend  more  than three  days in this city before  they  proceed  to heaven,  
yet, I am a sorrowful  creature;  I always remain  unhappy  because  
the mournings  of bereft human  beings come straight  to my
IREKE  ONIBUDO

ears. I receive  visitors  daily of this city. I am restless  because  
I receive  innumerable  visitors  at every  hour of the day. Man ’s 
life is full of sorrow,  vies, troubles  and 'crisis.  A man could  be 
removed  from  the world  by God  through  different  means  - child  
problem,  money  problem,  restlessness.  The creator  can use all 
the phenomena  to punish  men. I feel dejected  whenever  I think  
about  the world.  ^
'When  I think about  the world  in another  way, I become  
happy  because  of the beneficial  things  in It. The son and the 
moon;  the stars and all the animate  creatures;  the fishes  of the 
ocean  and the birds of the sky; the plants  arid the small  insects;  
the flowing  streams  and the various  stones;  the valleys,  and the 
plain lands  - all these are the good things  in the world.  Of all 
the creatures  created  by the  creator  in the world,  none is greater  
than human  beings.  Man is-God ’s heir. All the aerial,  aquatic,  
underground  and upland  creatures  are for the usage  of men.  And 
of all the creatures,  man has the most  functional  brain.;
‘Where  you are today  has its advantages  and disadvantages.  
It is the city of the dead. The dead prepare  for their heavenly  
journey  here,-"it  stands  as a resting  place.  No noise,  no fear, but it 
is not  a settlement  for the living.  As a result  of this, you must  not 
sleep  here till tomorrow  and  you must  not eat in anyone ’s house  
because  you have  the spirit  of the living  in you.'
"That  was what the king of the city said, the king of the dead city. When  he finished  his speech,  I asked  whether  he could  take me round  the city of if he couldn't show  m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              me more mysterious  things.  ^
“After I had. made that request,  he blew a trumpet  and I 
saw a multitude  of feet walking  towards  him.. The feet were  
that of human  beings  but the upper  parts of the bodies  were
unseen  by me; I only saw-  their waists  downward.  After that, 
I saw him sending  someone  on an errand.  The hand handing  
over something  to him was visible  but I did not see the rest of 
the body. He then took me,to  a room. I was shown  a mirror  
there with the instruction  that I should  continue  observing  it. 
That  I did. I saw  a multitude  of people  as they lined up  crossing  
a river. They  drank  from  it as they crossed.  Their  whole  bodies  
would  creep  into obscurity  as they did that. After  watching  the 
spectacle  for some  moments,  he said, ‘Those  being  watched  by 
you are the dead.  They  are no more  of the world.  They ’ve tasted  
the heavenly  water. ’
“After  that, he took  me to a rocky  place;  When  he got  there,  
he clapped  his hands  and I started  hearing  the deafening  sound  
of legs op the edge  of the rock.  He then  faced  me and said, ‘This 
is the rock of calculation.  It is here that people  calculate  what  
killed  them. ’
“Later,  I saw him facing  the rock as if he was  talking  ta 
someone  and then said, ‘What  killed  you? ’ Immediately  he said 
that, I heard  someone  replying  thus T left the world  as an infant:  
my mother  fan out of the room  with a container  of hot palm  oil 
which  fell on me suddenly. ’ After  that, he asked  from  the second  
person,  ‘What  killed  you? ’He then replied,  ‘I left the world  as 
an infant.  My mother  carelessly  left me as I was running  about  
on the highway.  That was how a vehicle  crushed  me to death. ’ 
He then asked  from  the third  person  and he answered,. ‘I left the 
world  as an infant.  My mother  carried  me upstairs  and came  
downstairs.  I peeped  out through  the window  and fell down. ’ He 
asked  from  the fourth  person  and he replied,  ‘I left the world  as 
an infant.  My mother  refused  to cover  me with  clothes  when  the 
weather  was cold. Through  that I got the disease  that killed  me. ’
IREKE  ONIBUDO

He then asked  the fifth person  and,  he replied,  ‘I left the world  
as an infant.  My mother  carried  me to an overflowing  river  and 
left me unnoticed.  Through  that I crawled  into the river and 
drowned. ’ He then asked  from the sixth person  and he replied  
T left the world  as an infant.  My father  loved  money  more  than 
children.  So, when  I had stomach problem,  he was told to  buy 
me drug  to cure  it, but he didn’t buy it until  the stomach  problem  
got out of hand  and killed  me. ’
“He asked  from  the seventh  person  and he replied,  T left the 
world  as an infant.  I died  of dysentery  that my father  and mother  
refused  to treat in time. ’ The eight  man also replied  thus, T left 
the world  as an infant.  I myself  caused  my death.  I climbed  a 
tree, fell down and broke  my bones. ’ The ninth-person  spoke  
thus, T left the world  as an infant.  I was a stubborn  boy. My 
playmates  stoned  me on the head, and I bled till I died. ’ The 
tenth  person  also replied,  T left the world  at infancy.  I peeped  
into a well and fell into it.’
“That  was how all of them  spoke  about  the different  causes  
of their  death.  All those  who spoke  were  young.  After  they had 
spoken,  Ilepa  who was the king of the town of the dead spoke  to me thus, ‘Take note of-the  things  you have heard.  Haven ’t you discovered  that some  things  that look  insignificant  to people  
bring  about  young  children ’s death?  Some  men  in the world  love 
money  more  than a home  and some other  things;  even  more  than 
their creator.  Those  are the people  that find it difficult  to give 
their children  feeding  money.  They are always  indifferent  to 
the unhealthy  condition  of their offsprings,  and the indifferent  
women  will always  be having  regrets  about  their  children?
“When  he finished  his words,  I replied  him thus: ‘Your  
Highness,  Ilepa,  king of the town of the dead. I’m extremely
IREKE  ONIBUDO

happy  to meet  you. I never  heard  about  you.  No one has ever  told 
me anything  concerning  your  city. But, I thank  you sincerely  for 
all that you’ve shown  me today and the lessons  I have learnt  
from  your speech.  Truly,  the son of man is supposed  to observe  
himself  always  but there  are some  people  in the world  with  eyes  
but without  sight.  They  are indifferent  to the little things.  They  
pave way for the accidents  encountered  by young  children.  I 
will never  forget  you and your generous  gestures  to. me. I was 
ignorant  of the whole  city  when  I arrived  here.  I still implore  you 
to do something  for me; I, who came  .to the city of the dead as a 
living, must  be skeptical  about  my safety.  Please,  tell me what  
I will do to avoid  colliding  with the dead because  I don ’t see 
them  but they see me. After  telling  me what  to do, please  do not 
hesitate  to tell me the path  I will take to arrive  in the town  called  
Ero-ehin  because  my journey  from home  was to the place.  Do 
those  things  for me, King llepa  God will bless  your  reign. ’
“After  I had finished  speaking,  he said, ‘The son Of man, if 
you had sought  for advice  concerning  Ero-ehin  town,  I would  have said you should  not go there. It is a town of death,  it is a town of epidemics,  it is a town of problems;  it is a town of 
restlessness  and unhappiness;  it is a town  of weeping;  a town  of 
hissing;  but if you insist  on going,  I’ll show  you the way. Look  
in front of you on that exact  spot occupied  by a big iroko  tree; 
that ’s the route  to Ero-ehin  town,  follow  it.
.For the dead, let me give you a power  that will make  you 
see them.  Have  this kolanut.  You ’ll see them  clearly  after  putting  
it in your cheek  — do not eat it. The second  kola-nut  I will give 
you is also  useful.  No one in the world  can see you when  you put 
it in your  mouth.  It is a charm  for invisibility. ’
“He gave  me the two kolanut  fhiits.  When  I put one of them  
in my mouth,  truly,  I saw all the dead  but I knew  none  of them.
IREKE  ONIBUDQ

All of them  were  passing  by my side but never  did as if they  saw 
me. I bade Ilepa  goodbye  immediately  I received  the kola-nut  fruits  and I told him that despite  the great  fear generated  by his explanations  about  Ero-ehin,  I still wanted  to get to-the  town  because  that was my destination  from  home.  And once my mind  was made  up about  anything,  it became  difficult  to change  it. I 
prepared  and started  the  journey. 
“I got to Ero-ehin  town  on the next  day ’s morning  and  what  I saw  there  were  so" much  that it would  be difficult  to serialize  one by one. On getting  there,  I met all of them  fighting  in accordance  
with one of their  traditions  to fight early in the morning  before  
having  breakfast. ’The fight  was a serious  one; they  beat  whoever  
they saw. They started  beating  me with sticks when they saw 
me. I was beaten  to a state of coma  and I fainted.  I was later 
resuscitated  by breeze.  After  regaining  my consciousness,  I went  
to the king ’s palace  to make  a report  but when  I got there,  the 
king,  who  had been beaten  till his legs got broken  and had lost 
two of his teeth,-  was being  resuscitated.  The streets  of Ero-ehin  town  were  filled  ^ith corpse^.  It was a rejected  town.
“As I was moving  around,  I saw a young  girl who greeted  
me and I related  to her all what  my eyes had seen. She was the 
one that  told me that fighting  was a daily  affair  in Ero-ehin  town.  She also said  that robbery  was a daily  exercise.  According  to her, robbery  and stealing  starts  by 6pm,  saying,  ‘Sir, find somewhere  
to hide in the evening  because  your-trousers  could  be stolen. ’ 
I told her that I had nowhere  to stay and she said,  she would  
discuss  with  her father  whether  he could  host me.

“True to her words,  she told her father  and I was hosted  by 
them. But  when  I got to him,  what  I heard  baffled  me. He greeted ’ 
me well and said, ‘The son of man, you are in Ero-ehin  town.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

This is the palace  of Rikisi-gori-ite.  He. is our king. You are in 
a town  of crisis.  Rikisi-gori-ite  receives  orders  from  the devil.  I will tell you the traditional  timetable  of this town  as drawn  by the king.
First; At daybreak,  each  person  must  be beating  his or her friend.  
A violent  physical  combat  must start in the town. Whoever  
refuses  to do that will be a recipient  of the king ’s wrath.
8a.m: Everyone  must  gather  in heaps  the corpses  of those  who 
died in the fights  at his  backyard.
9a.m: The time for curses  and abuses.  All  the natives  of this 
town  must  be cursing  and abusing  one another  violently.  
lOa.m: All the natives  must  go to eat.
11 a.m; This is the time  for the meeting  of liars.  Everybody  must  
be telling  lies so difficult  to fault. It is also the time for 
conspiracy.  Each  person  must solicit  for the support  of 
another  person  to cause  the downfall  of someone  else.
12noon:  This  is the time  for  pride  of  everyone.  A poor man  should  
be boasting  of his wealth  and he should  be mocking  a 
wealthy  man as someone  with nothing.
Ip.m: This is the time for backbiting. Everyone  must  be telling  
someone  the secrets  of another  person.
2p.m: This is, the time for cheating.  Each person  must look  
for someone  to cheat. The cheat must document'  the 
name  of the one cheated in order  to show  it to the law 
enforcement  agents  that check.
3p.m: Time  for lunch
4 p.m and 5 p.m: Natives  hold  robbery  meetings.  This is the time  
to think  and plan about  the houses  to burgle.
6 p.m: Stealing  and robbery  starts.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

You must have certainly  discovered  that this is not a town of 
progress.  It is a town of destruction;  a town of dejection.  So, I 
advise  you to leave here early if you want to make  something  
good  out of your  life. ’
“That  was how ’ the father  of the girl addressed  me and I 
started  ruminating  on how to escape.
“They  started  locking  the doors and the windows  of their  
house as from 5.30 p.m because  of the thieves.  There were  
robbery  operations  in one hundred  and forty  places  before  dawn.  
The cap put on by me was stolen  before  dawn and a box of 
clothes  was stolen  in my host ’s house.  The girl that took me to 
the place  was beaten  to death  on the second  day when  she went  
to fetch  water  from  the stream.  They  beat  her to death  during  the 
time for physical  assault  and combat.
“Ero-ehin  is a coastal  town.  I then started  planning  on how to escape  by sea. But there was no seaport  there except  one swam  to the central  part of the sea to board  a moving  ship.
“On  a day ’s morning,  I observed  a ship on the sea. I prepared  
to go and board it but some people  started  pursuing  me as I 
jumped  to the sea. I later swam  to the depth  of the sea and they 
lost sight  of me. I re-appeared  where  the ship was and boarded  
it. It was a merchant ’s ship. After  staying  for sometime  inside  it, 
I identified  some  of the occupants.  I inquired  about  where  they 
were going  and they told me. I asked  them  whether  they could  
allow  me to enter  into partnership  with  them  for us to be sharing  
the profits  and they agreed.  I had some  amount  of money  with
me by then.  The money  I carried  from  the house  of that spirit.

“Sometimes  later,  we got to a town  where  their  commodities  
were very cheap.  Banana  was very cheap  - a bunch  of sixty  
pieces  was a penny;  eight  eggs  of hen was half-a-penny;  and ten
coconut  fruits was a penny.  Twenty-five  litres of palm oil cost 
half-a-shilling:  We bought  all these farm products  and loaded  
them  into our ship. The ship was full to the brim.  But I became  
a victim  of an occurrence  in the ship, which  I will tell you. My 
friend, it was  so tragic. ”


Chapter  4
Gargantuan  Mermaid,  the Queen  of the 
Fishes  of the Oceans
“As we left the town  where  we purchased  the goods,  there  was 
a tempest.  The tempest  was blowing  violently  into our ship. To 
avoid  beating  about  the bush;  the tempest  capsized  our ship.
“What  baffled  me most  was that as our ship capsized,  I was  
trying  to hold on to its wood  but someone  was pulling  my legs 
under  the sea. After  struggling  for a "while,  I became  tired and 
left myself  to the mercy  of death.  But when  I got into the river,  
i saw my assailant.  He locked  me up inside  a big box which  he 
carried  and he entered  the box with me. I observed  that I was 
breathing  very well when  I entered  the box and that my captor  
was not a human  being.  He tied an apron,  had an hairless  head  
and long  fingernails.  He had a  tail’s fin and two human  eyes.  The  
two eyes  were  bigger  than  man’s and they  were  as circular  as the 
moon.  He had long  nostril  hairs  like the antennae  of the fish. His 
eyes were  like a lion ’s - big and thick.
“My captor  did not leave me in peace.  As the reflective  
box made its downward  journey  towards  the sea, he would  
sometimes  pull my ears; he would  later slap me on the cheek.  
He would  a little  while  later  pinch  and terrify  me by opening  his 
eyes and teeth  widely.  In a little while,  he would  pull apart  my 
lower  and upper  lips to almost  a point  of detachment. There  Were  
snail shells  in the box-house.  He was using  them  to scratch  my 
body  to a point  that my skin started  peeling  off. Later,  I started  
begging  him, rubbing  my hands  to court his sympathy  but he
IREKE  ONIBUDO

was indifferent  to my pleas,  torturing  me as we were  going.
“Sooner,  the box-house  got to the sea depth.  I saw him as he 
went  out and pushed  the house  forward. He then  pulled  me out of 
it. On looking  back,  I observed  that a big thick  mirror-like  rock  
had bounded  the sea and the land. I was on a white  plain,  land.  
When  I observed  my front, I saw a very beautiful  mansion;  its 
frontage  was full bf green  flowers  that were  uniformly  trimmed  
to the same height.  This made  the environment  appear  like-the  
palace  of a respectable  king. Before was a route that led to 
where  my captor  was taking  me to. It was a big road  full of white  
sand.  After  we had walked  about  fifty feet, I saw two pillars  — 
each  on the right-and  left. A big signpost  was placed  on them.  It 
contained  this notice:
THIS  IS THE  PALACE  OF THE  GARGATUAN  
MERMAID,  THE LEADER  OF THE  FISHES  
OF THE OCEAN.  THE FESTIVAL  OF 
GARGANTUAN-MERMAID  IS AROUND  
THE CORNER.  THE AQUATIC  SPIRITS  
IN THE OCEAN  SHOULD  GO AND LOOK  
FOR HUMAN  BEINGS  TO BE USED  FOR  
SACRIFICE  BY THE  QUEEN.
“The spirit had tied my two,  hands  backward  immediately  
I got out of the mobile  house  that took me to the depth of-the  
sea. He was pushing  me to the front  violently  through  the road  
with his left hand.  I saw his replicas  as they lined up  on the two 
roadsides  from  where  there  were  two pillars.  They  were  the law 
enforcement  agents,  .After  walking  for a while,  we drew near  the 
mansion  I had earlier  seen; I observed  it was a big palace.
“We entered  the palace;  its beauty  is indescribable.  We 
were seeing  magnificent  golden  materials  as we continued  the
IREKE  ONIBUDO

journey.  A little while later, we got to a plain land within  the 
palace  where  there  were  arranged  gems,  glittering  like lightning.  
On looking  at the northern  end of the plain  land,  I saw somebody  
that sat like a queen.  That  was the Gargantuan-mermaid.  She did 
not look  like a fish. She was like a lady. Her hair  was beautifully  
plaited.  Her body  was covered  with newly  dyed  velvet  cloth.  A 
red velvet  was used to cover  the background  of the throne.  A 
staircase  made  of stones  adorned  the route  that led to her throne  
from the ground  level. The whole  environment  was extremely  
beautiful.
“She rose up when she saw  me. It was when she stood  
up that I discovered  she had tailfins  like a fish. She shouted  
and cautioned  the spirit  that was bringing  me as we appeared  
saying,  ‘Stop him, stop him over there; the son of man must  
not get close  to me. What  does the son of man stand  for? He is 
a scorpion  that is for destruction;  a green  snake  under  the green  
grass; the source  of sorrow  for all creatures.  Man stands  like 
someone  that uses the face of his sword  to rub the ground.  He 
uses the position  divinely  given  to him oppressively.  Who  is up 
to your  standard,  human  beings?  How  do you behave  to fishes?  
A small  fish is a man ’s enemy;  a big fish is a man ’s enemy.  If 
human  beings  only kill and eat fishes,  we would  not have  been  
much  aggrieved  because  they are divinely  positioned  to do so 
but the punishment  that uncountable  number of  them  mete out 
to fishes before  killing  them  is contrary  to the commandment  of 
God.  I am the Gargantuan-mermaid,  the queen  of all the fishes in 
the oceans.  Your  life ends today;  I must surely  eliminate  you. I 
just want  you to choose  the nature  of death  you want.  Whether  I 
should  kill you at once  now or treat  you the way you treat  fishes  
by giving  you an assignment  that will culminate  in your  gradual  
transition.  That means  giving  you difficult  tasks. You should
IREKE  ONIBUDO

know  that you can in no way be spared.  I am the administrator  
of all the inhabitants  of the rivers  - hippopotamus,  
snakes  and all the  other  big aquatic  animals.  The ocean  is my 
only senior  among  them.* “Those were the utterances  of the wicked  creature  and 
I replied  her thus, ‘Your majesty,  even though  you are so 
embittered,  I have  to express  my happiness  today  for being  able 
to know  you as the administrator  of all the fishes  of the oceans  
and I want  you to know  that as the rat remains  powerless  in the 
presence  of a cat, so I remain  powerless  in your presence.  A§ 
a deer remains  passive  in the presence  of the lion, so I remain  
passive.  But, I don ’t want you to think that all human  beings  
are wicked  to fishes.  Truly, God endowed  human  beings  with  
wisdom,  yet they are morally  different  from one another.  I as 
your  captive  have never  been  wicked  to the fishes.  I have  never  
had any disagreement  with  hippopotamus.  Never  has any of the  
amphibious  creatures  and I had a disagreement.  If your  decision  
is to kill me, do not do that today.  Give me the work  that will 
bring  me gradual  death.  Your  Majesty. ’
“After  my last response,  she agreed  to allow  me work  and 
die on it, but the first task she gave me was so difficult  to the 
extent  that the only thought  I had was that death  was hovering  
precariously  on my head. She said' ‘This is the work  you have  
to do for me. Before  tomorrow ’s dusk,  you must  build  a house  
that contains  twelve  rooms  of twelve  feet each  in the front  of my 
palace.  If it is undone,  I will kill you tomorrow. ’ My friend,  can’t 
you observe  that the task was nothing  but death  for me? I burst  
into tears,  begging  her not to do so  but she was totally  indifferent  
to my pleas. She ordered  the removal  of the rope on my hands  
and said I should  be taken  to her mother ’s apartment  to sleep  till 
dawn.
68 IREKE  ONIBUDO

“I was given a room in the house  and served  food'^ I ate 
and slept.  As I slept,  someone  touched  me and called  my name, , ‘ireke Onibudo,  put;on  the light. ’ I became  surprised  and I  put the light on. On looking  at the visitor,  I discovered  she was my 
late mother.  I wanted  to embrace  her but she said I shouldn ’t. I 
prepared  again  to hold  her but I held  emptiness.  She then started  
speaking  thus:*
‘My child, Ireke Onibudo,  I saw the sufferings  you ’ve been  
wading  through  since  I left the world  and I want to assure  you 
that you’ll never  perish  in them.  Happiness  will be your  reward  
at the end of your life. Fear not the Gargantuan-mermaid.  She 
will do nothing.  The heaven ’s battalion  will be following  me 
now to do the work  given  to you before  dawn. ’
“As my mother  said that, she used  her fingers  to draw  lines  
on the ground  of the four sides  of the room.  At once,  the ground  
opened  up, the troops  of  heaven  came  out with  hoes  and  cutlasses,  
gourds  and containers  and they started  working.  They  finished  
the task of building  construction  given  me by the Gargantuan-  
mermaid  just before  dawn. On the second  day ’s morning,  the 
Gargantuan-mermaid  was startled  because  she could  not unravel  
how I executed  the task.
“After  this, she gave,  me another  assignment  that could  not 
be easily  done by any human  being.  She said I should  go and 
cultivate  a farm in her backyard  and plant a yam seedling  that 
would  develop  leaves,  grow  and mature  on fist day I planted  it. 
Except  I did that, she said my body  would  be dispossessed  of my 
head.
“On hearing  that, I entered  my room,  weeping  and calling  
my mother  for help,  thus, ‘My mother;  my timely  mother;  my 
powerful  mother;  my heavenly  mother;  my wise,  mother;  my
IREKE  ONIBUDO0

intelligent  mother;  the mother  that loves her children  to the 
peak;  my earthy  mother;  my heavenly  mother;  the mother  that 
loves everybody;  my late mother  that belongs  to the society  
of the famous  heavenly  people  - the princesses  of heaven;  the 
custodian  of the root of victory;  those greater  than all other  
creatures.  My mother!  I My mother! ! My mother! ! ’
“That was how I cried  and my mother  heard.  She emerged  
from  the ground  with someone.  When  I told her she said it was 
not difficult  to get a yam  seedling  that could  mature  in a day. The 
person  that accompanied  her said such a yam seedling  was in 
heaven  but could  be got in a far-away  place  there;  consequently,  
she had to fly .there.  My mother  quickly  implored  her to do so. 
She at once  stamped  her feet on the ground  and it opened  up; she 
entered  and flew into it. She later returned  with yam seedlings;  
they were  small.  Each  one had the size of palm-kernel  fruit.
“After  that, my mother  called  on the heavenly  battalion  and 
they  emerged  from  the ground  with  their  cutlasses  and hoes. The 
work  was done  within  a short  moment.  The yam seedlings  grew  
immediately  and swelled  up; the heaps  in the farm also swelled  
up. My mother  and the heavenly  battalion  returned  to heaven  
at cockcrow.  I woke  up at sunrise  and went to the Gargantuan-  
mermaid  after brushing  my teeth and washing  my face to tell 
her that I had finished  the task given  to me. After  telling  her, she 
went  to confirm  it. She shouted  to the extent  that all her chiefs  
heard:  the land also shook “because  she had started  thinking that 
I might  defeat  her instead  of her eliminating  me. The incident  
terrified  her to the extent  that she could  not bathe  for six hours  
on that day despite  the fact that she used to bathe  hourly  under  
normal  circumstances.  ^
IREKE  ONIBUDO0

“After  that, she said I would  be allowed  to go if I could  
execute  the last assignment  she would  give me. She said there  
was a beast  called  ‘Terrific-goat ’ which  used to trouble  them  in 
that settlement;  it used to  descend  from  heaven.  I was then  given  
the task of fighting  with it. If I then killed  the beast,  I would  be 
liberated.  She gave  the next seven  days for the fight  and told me 
to be living  in her mother ’s house.  The mother  who was  a witch  
had been instructed  by her to cannibalize  me before  the day of 
the fight. I overheard  when she told her mother  that, but she 
didn’t know.

“My room  faced  the backyard  of the Gargantuan-mermaid's  
mother  and I had been observing  six big pots there since my 
arrival  as being  mysterious.  I witnessed  something  one  night  
of the day the queen  of the fishes  told me of the fight. I laid on 
the floor  of my room  watching  the witch-mother  as she entered  
one of the big pots. On doing  that, a python  emerged  from  the 
pot; it crawled  around  for sometime  but did not get to where  
I was. Later,  it entered  the pot nearest  to me and after coming  
out, it turned  to be mother  of the Gargantuan-mermaid.  After  
that, she entered  another  pot. Having  done that, a lion emerged  
from  the pot. Some  moments  later, the lion entered  the pot near 
me and turned  to the mother  of the Gargantuan-mermaid.  That  
was how the woman  experimented  many  things  with the pots,  
metamorphosing  to various  things.  She was changing  to her 
natural  being  in the pot near me. I was watching  all her actions  
because  there  was moonlight.  
“On the night  of the next day, I put the kola nut.^iven  to 
me by Ilepa of the town of the dead in my mouth  to prevent  being  seen  by anyone.  I brought  out  my mat and spread  it under  
a tree outside.  The woman  had planned  to kill me on that day.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

She changed  to a python  in my presence  and entered  my room,  
searching  for "me: She searched  For me but did not see me. I 
entered  my room  after  she had come  out of it. The kola  nut in my 
mouth  was removed  at daybreak.  She was looking  at me with 
utmost  surprise.
“That was how I hid each night for six consecutive  days.  
She was always  searching  for me every night but failed to 
capture  me until  a day prior  to the seventh  day appointed  to fight  
Terrific-goat.  On that night,  she turned  to a. python.  When  I saw 
this, I turned  the pot of herb she was using  to change  back to 
a human  form upside  down.  She tried every  possible  means  to 
change  to her former  self  but it was to no avail. She crawled  to 
the forest  at dawn.  Her daughter  searched  for her to no avail.  She 
'enquired  from  me but I said I had not seen her.
At cockcrow  on the appointed  day;  my  mother  came  and gave  
file a silvery  sword, instructing,  Treke  Onibudo, be prepared  like 
a man today.  Act like a-brave  man; make  your  heart  as hard as 
an indestructible  rock. Remember,  Ireke  Onibudo,  that Terrific-  
goat is not an earthly  beast.  It is a destructive  domestic  animal.  
Satan,  the king of hell fife, is its master.  The goat has ’ sixty-one  
horns  on its head. When  it appears  yonder,  all the horns  would  
be emitting  fife. The fire, still burs  even  when  it touches  water.  
But take this, use this oil to rub your  body  and wait  for him;-the  
fire on its body  won ’t burn  you. When  it arrives,  fight  with  it and 
search  for the sword.  If you can perseveringly  do this, you will 
defeat  it. Put the kola nut you got from the city of the dead in 
^ your  mouth'  The creator  will support  you today ’ Those  were  the 
words  gf my mother  to me. She entered  the ground  after  this.
“At one o’clock  in the morning;  the Gargantuan-mermaid  
called  me and said we should  go to the arena  for the fight.-She
0IREKE  ONIBUDO

led the way and  I followed.  She held a sheep.  Later,  we got to an 
area having  a sandy,  mound.  It was a plain  land of about  twenty  
kilometers  in length  and breadth;  the whole  terrain  was very  
sandy.
“When  we got to the exact place housing  the mound,  the 
Gargantuan mennaid  killed  the sheep  that she-took  along,  dug 
a hole on the mound  and poured  its blood in it. She then hit 
a bunch  of palm frond  on the ground  thrice.  In the third time,  
she shouted  loudly,  inviting  Terrific-goat.  Immediately,  the land 
started  cracking  and smoke  was coming  out. It was so much  
that we  almost  lost sight  of each  other.  It soon  started  subsiding.  
As I looked  in front  of me, I saw the beast,  with sixty  violently  
flaming  horns,  running  towards  us.
“The velocity  of its speed  was so much  that the Gargantuan-  
mermaid  took  to her heels. T ’he beast  jumped  up to stab me with  
its horns  when-it  nearly  got to where  I stood,  but I-quickly  tucked  
the mysterious  kola  nut in my mouth  to pave  way  for invisibility.
“After  that; I cautiously  squatted  under  the beast  and held 
it by the neck.  The entire  flame  on its head enveloped  me but I 
wasn’t burnt. If  stabbed  me with  the horns  till I fell down  because  
it was able to see me when I removed  the kola nut in my mouth  
on getting  under  it. It pounced  on Me when  I fell down.  I pushed  
it off from  my top and pounced  on it. It also fell on  me. That  was 
how  we.  were  rolling  on each other  successively.
“Some  moments  later, my mother  changed  to a bird and 
flew  to me to remind  of the sword  in my hand.  Consequently,  
I adroitly  removed  it from its sheath,  held the animal  by the 
beards  and drove  in the sword  to its throat.  The poison  of the 
sword  was at once  felt by it. It fell down; the fire on its head  was 
dying  off as if jerked  spasmodically.  Soon,  it jerked  no more and
IREKE  ONIBUDO

gave  up the ghost.  But the occurrence  caused  a serious  dejection  
for the Gargantuan-mermaid  because  she found  me indomitable:  
her own end was -in the offing.  She thought-deeply  to no avail  
about  what  she could  do next to eliminate  me.
“As I once  said,  her end was near.  My mother  came  with  the 
heavenly  troops  at night.  We heard  gunshots  as the Gargantuan-  
mermaid  shouted.  By morning,  all the residents  of the palace  
were dead. A chain tied the Gargantuan-mermaid  to the sky 
- dead. Some moments  later, my mother  appeared  to me and 
took me to the private  Toom  of the Gargantuan-mermaid.  I was 
highly  surprised  to see numerous  precious  materials.  We entered  
a room where  there were some silvery  pots containing  gold,  
diamond  and gem. I took some of them. I could  not carryall  
because  of their  heavy  weight  but the ones  I carried  were  enough  
to transform  me to a wealthy  man for the rest of my life.
^ “When  we got out of the house,  my mother said  that  it was 
high time  1 left the place.  I packed  my load - it was packed  by 
my mother  and I. She instructed  me to follow  her and I obeyed.  
After  walking  for a while,  she showed  me the way to follow.  
She then said she would  part with me. She stamped  her foot on 
the ground,  it opened  up under  her feet and she started  entering,  
greeting  me. Thick  drops of bloody  tears were trickling  down  
from  her eyes.  I also wept  till I almost  lost my eyeballs.
“After  she had left, I went  through  the route shown  me by 
her, trekking.  I trekked  for a while  and was later  feeling  hungry.
I soon got to a junction  where  I saw a bunch  of ripe bananas.
I called  on the seller  of the banana  but received  no response.  I 
observed  that the whole  bunch  was worth  one shilling.  I dropped  
a shilling  and carried  it. I ate it till the dusk  of that day. I did not 
get to any settlement  where  I could sleep.  As a result,  I slept  
under  the trees in the heart  of the forest.


“When  I woke  up the next day, I felt hungry  but I was not 
interested  in banana.  It was on that day that I discovered  that 
the value  of money  is different  from  the value  of food. I carried  
money  on the head and I had nothing  to buy with it; it was 
impossible  to change  money  to food. Later,  I got to where  there  
was a palm  tree with  ripe palm  kernel  fruits  that fell underneath  
it, I sat down  and started  eating  them.  I saw a fiming-bird  flying  
near  the ground  as I was eating.  I killed  it with  the aid of a stone.  
The bird was my meal  till the day gave  way to the night.
“On the morning  of third day at about  9 o’clock,  I met a 
woman  who  was  hawking  some  hot  maize  cobs.  I was  excessively  
happy  because  that showed  that I was drawing  near  a settlement,  
and because  I could  get something  to douse  the fire of hunger  
in me. I bought  some cobs of maize  as well as walnut  bits.  I 
put my load on the road and ate. A stream  was there;  so, I drank  
water  to wash  down  -the maize.
“1 carried  my-load  and continued  my journey  after  eating.  I 
overheard  uproars  from  the town  as I drew  near it - the wailing  
of a multitude  of people.  On getting  there,  I saw a lot of men  and women;  the king  of the town  sat conspicuously  at a place  and the. 
police  took  me to him.  I paid  him  homage  as ‘Your  Majesty ’ when  
I got there  but he could  not respond  to my salutation  because  his. 
regalia  was already  tear-soaked;  he had been  weeping.  When  
asked  from someone  the reason  for the sorrowful  occasion,  he 
took me to a place,  of about stone-throw  distance.  On getting  
there,  I saw a beautiful  lady tied to the ground  with a rope  Ashe  
was severely  tied. The man told me that she was a princess  and
that she was the cause  of the king ’s mourning  because  her death  
would  come  on that very day.
IREKEONIBUDO

“When I asked him the reason for the incident,  he 
responded  thus, ‘This town you are  in is a sorrowful  one called  
Alupayida.  Its a town of sorrow.  A destructive  flying  python  has been troubling  this town since  the beginning  of the world.  
It flies down  from the sky to trouble the people.  But this year,  
the herbalists  and other  native  doctors  inquired  about  how the 
occurrence  could  be stopped.  They then leant  that the python  
would  stop  its terrorist  acts if the king  could  offer  the princess  as 
a sacrifice  today.  The snake  will soon appear from  above  to kill 
and gobble  the girl. ’
“I was highly  surprised  by his  Words,  I was also terrified  
because  I had never  seen or-met  a girl as pretty  as such. She was 
neither  too black  not too fair,'-  she was very fair in complexion;  
she was neither  too fat nor too slender;  her body  looked  fresh;  
glossy  and bewitching,  her eyeballs  were  as clear  as an infant’s. 
The small  eyelashes  on her eyelids  were  black  and slender;  her 
eyelids  were  like a newly-risen  moon  on the sky. Her teeth  were  
small  and white  as dog s own-uniform  and have  the same  height.  
Her lips appeared  moderate;  neither  thick nor slender;  not too 
black  or too red; it fitted the mouth  perfectly.  Her tongue  was 
fed and stainless.  The hairs on her head-were  black,  shining  and 
beautifully plaited.

“I became  sad on seeing  her and I told the king that I would  
fight  with  the python  and defeat  it. He disagreed  and told me that 
I should  not do so because,  first  of all, I could  not conquer  it; and 
secondly,  the snake  would  torment  the townspeople  a lot more  
after  my adventurous  move  might  have  ended  in futility.I  heard  
his advice  but remained  adamant.  There  was a deafening  uproar  
from the people  that the python  was approaching  from  the sky 
during  my discussion  with the king.  He stood  up immediately  to
observe  what  would  befall  his daughter.  I unsheathed  my sword,  
the sword  given  to me by my mother  from the graveyard  to be 
used  to fight  Terrific-goat.  I stood  beside  the girl after  unsheathing  
my sword.  It continued  to ‘charge towards  us'.
“As it flew down  menacingly  to carry  the girl, I held it by 
the neck.  It left her at once and faced  me. It  hit me on the chest  
with its head'  and I staggered  backward.  After  this, the wicked  
python  twisted  around  me like a climber-rope  coils round  a tree 
in the-forest.  It coiled  round  my waist  and coiled  round  my trunk  
from the waist  to the neck. It then  .started  flogging  me with its 
tail. I was flogged  till I fell down  and we both rolled  rapidly  on 
the ground.  That  was when  I was able to get hold of my sword.  
I removed  it from its sheath  and stabbed  its stomach  with the 
pointed  head. It entered  its body system;  it disengaged  itself  
from  my body,  raised  up its neck  and trunk;  roared  like a lion as 
a result  of the effect  of the sword ’s venom on it. It rested  its neck  
on the ground,  using  the head  to roll through  the refuse  as a duck  
uses its beak  to search  for food in a stream.  I once again  held to 
my sword  firmly  raised  it up with my two hands  and struck  it 
on-the  neck  - the head  was almost  severed  off completely.  That  
was how I conquered  the pernicious  python  that was consuming  
people ’s' offsprings. ”

Chapter  5
My Sojourn  in Alupayida  Town
“I cannot  relate  precisely  the magnitude  of the happiness  of the 
Counterfeit  people  when I conquered  the python.  There was 
ecstatic  jubilation  all over  the town;  they  were  blowing  trumpets  
and beating  drums  as each of them danced.  The king himself  
danced  and ordered  some stout,  healthy-looking  young  men to 
carry  me on their  shoulders  all over  the town.
“The liberated  princess  came,  knelt  down  and greeted  me. 
I didn’t want  her to kneel  down  due to her stunning beauty.  On 
smiling,  her teeth were as white as processed  cotton.  I had 
comfort  in my heart  that I had saved  an attractive  person  from  
death  because  nothing  could  bring  joy to one ’s mind  than doing  
good  to another  person.
“In the morning  of the next day, the king invited  me and 
I went. When  I got to the palace  he asked  me my name.  After  
telling  him, he spoke  thus, ‘Ireke Onibudo,  may your lifetime  
be good: may your lifetime  be good;  your thing ’s will not get 
destroyed  in your  presence.  As the lion remains  powerful  in the 
midst  of the beasts  so will God endow  you with power  among  
the human  race. May you never  be defeated  by man; may you 
never  enter  the trap of Satan.  May  everyone  continue  to elevate  
you.  Thank  you,  thank  you,  thank  you, and thank  you very  much.
I don ’t want you to leave  this town again.  I want to make  you 
a chief. I want you to become  my second-in-command.  I also 
want  to give you a daughter  for marriage  to enable  you become  
my son-in-law.  You should  tell me the one you love among  my
0IREKE  ONIBUDO

daughters  after  knowing  them  well and I will betroth  her to you. 
I own the whole of this palace;  I also have houses  within  the 
town;  you will be given  one of the houses  I have in the town  
as your residence.  Your wife should  also be taken there after  
marriage.  Thank  you very  much.  Ireke  Onibudo,  that was what  I 
purposely  called  you for. ’
“That was the king ’s speech  to me and I became  highly  
surprised.  I fell short of words.  I prostrated  fully and put sand  
on my head and said, ‘Your Highness,  the commander,  deputy  
of Gods.  I don ’t even know  what  to say to thank  you for your  
invaluable  words.  My action  wasn’t through  my power.  I was 
destined  by God  to do so. Your  words  are completely  understood  
by me but you should  not be offended  if I say that I am not so 
important  to think  of becoming  a chief  in this town.  What  do I 
have?  Nothing.  I have  nobody  in the world.  I am fatherless.  I’m 
also without  a mother.  So, I don ’t think  you should  make  me a 
chief Concerning  my residing  in this town,  I have no contrary  
opinion  because  I can sing a song in this town  thus, ‘Who says 
we have  no father?  Yes, we have  a father;  the King  of Alupayida  is our father;  
yes, we have  a father. ’ If you also have  the thought  
of betrothing  a daughter  of yours  to me. Your  Highness,  I can’t 
reject  because  I am a bachelor.  You will be contacted  on my 
thought  concerning  having  a wife.  Your  Majesty. ”
“That was ray response  to the king ’s speech.  After that, 
he gave me a meal of com and pepper  soup. The pepper  soup  
was fried with turkey  meat; vegetable  oil was used to prepare  
it. When  I finished  eating,  he called  one of his wives  and told 
her to give me a bottle  of wine.  I received  and brought  it home.  
But when  I wanted  to leave the palace,  the king called  on-his  
daughter  rescued  by me from the malevolent  python  saying.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

Ifepade,"won ’t you come  and thank  Ireke  Ombudo? ’
That was when  I knew  the girl’s name.  She came,  smiled  and 
greeted me shyly.  I also spoke  bravely  thus, ‘That foolish  python  
wanted  to wreck  havoc,  not knowing  that its end had come!  ’ She 
escorted  me out of the palace.  I later told her to go back, she 
did so but told me to be expecting  her messengers-  as* soon as 
possible.
“I came  to my residence  in the town  with  joy in my heart  
that I had become  the apple  of the king ’s eye. In the evening,  I 
saw two young-girls  in gorgeous  dresses;  they entered  my house  
with plates of food on their heads.  When  they brought  them  
down,  they knelt  down  greeted  and said the princess  sent them  
to give me the food and a letter.  The content  went  thus:
December  TO, 1946 AD

Dear  Ireke  Onibudo,
I must allow  you to know  how you are in my heart.  You 
are at the central  part of it. -What you did for me is forever  
memorable.  There is no way I can reciprocate.  Someone  that 
endangered  his life for the sake of another  person  has reached  
the zenith of benevolent  gesture.  If not for your sake, today ’s 
cockcrow  would  have  met me in the courtyard  of heaven.  Thank  
you for your  care over  me. Please,  help me to  manage  this small  
meal and be expecting  me at 4 o' clock tomorrow.  My-father  
sends  his greetings;  my mother  also sends  hers.
I am yours,
Ifepade


“That was the content  of the girl’s- letter. I became  
extraordinarily  happy  on reading  it. When  I uncovered  the meal,
I discovered  that it was  prepared  with' duck meat; not one but 
six. I also replied  the letter.'  What  I wrote  was:
December  10, 1946  AD
My Dear  Ifepade,
As it is impossible  for a three-day-old  baby to narrate  the 
story of his father ’s life, so it is difficult  for me to express  my 
happiness  on receiving  your letter and the palatable  food you 
sent to me. I want you to know that this association  of ours 
is not artificial.  We were divinely  created  for each other. The 
portion  occupied  by you in my heart is more invaluable  than 
the one inhabited  by me in your  own heart.  Ifepade,  I want  you 
to recognize  one fact. If the heart  of a duck  is removed  from  its 
body,,  can it do anything  again?  Or if a cock ’s heart is parted  
from it, what remains  of it? That is what you are to me, you 
are the heart. I’m ,the cock and the duck. My departure  from  
your place when I came there was not from my heart; it was 
done  to prevent  becoming  a nuisance  to your  father.  If my wish  
had prevailed,  I would  have stayed  back  for your  sake; I would  
have  remained  with  you till dusk.  I will be expecting  you at the 
promised  time tomorrow.
I am affectionately  yours,  
Ireke  Onibudo

“My friend,  that was the content  of my letter. With all 
frankness  and sincerity,  I loved  her so much;  I wanted  to marry  
her I could  not sleep  till the next  day. I dreamt  about  the ^1 th^ 
only time  I slumbered.

“On the morning  of the next day, I took care of the room  
given  me in my residence  after taking  my bath and breakfast.  I 
took care of it very well in anticipation  of my guest ’s evening 
visit. I had gone out to purchase  a lot of clothes  after the day 
of my victory  over  that harmful  python  because  I was having  a 
lot of money;  yet no clothes.  At three o’clock  op the visitation  
day, I brought  down  all my attires  and wore a velvet  dansiki.  I examined  myself  in the mirror  and observed  that my face did not look attractive.  I took my bottle  of cream  and rubbed  my 
body  with it. Having  done  that, I evaluated  my appearance  with  
the mirror  again  and noticed  that my face appeared  too fresh.  i 
then begged  one  of the household ’s children  to buy me a tin of 
powder.  He went  but it was already  five minutes  to four o’clock  
when  he came  back.  I quickly  applied  some  powder  on my face,  
r got hold of a small  handkerchief  and used it to clean off the 
excess.

“As I was doing  that, a small  child  came  in to tell me that I 
had a visitor.  My inquiry  showed  it was the princess.  I quickly  
went to receive  her. The most  painful  thing  was that I did not 
want  her to know  that I had used powder  for her not to think  
that my fashion  was too much;  too much  fashion  brings  about  
ignominy.  But as she entered,  she brought  out an handkerchief  
and cleaned  off"  the powder  on my neck  which  I had not clean  off 
completely.  I remained  indifferent  to her action  despite  the fact 
that I felt shy.
“She came  like a princess  indeed.  She tied a pink wrapper  
that had never  been  put on by anyone,  it was genuinely,  new. A 
headgear,  accurately  matching  the wrapper, was  also tied by her. 
It was frontally  tied and raised  up at the left side. A pink upper  
garment  and a pair of beaded  shoe  were also put on by her.


She carried  a beaded  handbag.  Some  bead-like  golden  materials  
were  also fabricated  and tied on the edges  of her handbag;  they 
clattered  as she walked.  Her shawl  was-made  from a glittering,  
glossy and. kaleidoscopic  damask  material.  Her body was 
smooth; as  smooth  as that of a day-old  baby.  There  was no single  
spot on her body  and no single  scar. She rubbed  some  powder  
on her face and perfumed  her body. All her fingernails  were  
trimmed  and perfectly  washed. Her  palms  were clean,  soft and 
icy. All the materials  she put on were  accurate.  She was naturally  
beautiful  and healthy.
“I gave her a seat and drew  my own closer  to her after  her 
entrance  and we started  discussing.  Something  was observed  by 
me in her manner  of expression;  it was gentle  and soft. She was 
also articulate  in her expression  that is always  accompanied  with  
smiles  exhibiting  her snow-like  white  set of teeth.
“Our discussion  was not much  but I titillated  her to express  
her feelings  about  me. I  asked  ‘What  is your  own  view  on what  
your  father  told  me yesterday? ’ She answered,  asking,  ‘What  was 
that? ’ I also reacted,  ‘That  he would  betroth  one of his daughters  
to me. ’ Having  said that, her reaction  was not accompanied  with  
a smile  as she said, ‘My father  was expressing  his own view.  He 
can’t force anyone  to marry  a man in as much  as one doesn’t 
agree with the man for marriage. ’ I reacted  as if I supported  
her utterances  saying,  ‘One cannot  do that to the modem  day 
children. ’
“We played  further.  Her handbag  was collected  by me and 
a mirror  having  golden  edges  was seen by me in it. I observed  it 
for some  moment;  she told me how  she came  about  it - her father  
bought  if for her as a birthday  gift. We then  played  ayo game  for sometime  because  I had a trough  for the game  in my house.  She defeated  me twice and I beat her once.  Towards  evening,,  when  
it was almost half  past five,  she said she was returning  home,  
I begged her  not to feel offended  by my inability  to offer her 
something  but I escorted  her very well. The palace  fence  was
clearly  seen  by us before  I went  back:
I heard  nothing  from her the next day but  the king sent a 
message  to me that T should  be preparing  for the title to be given  
to me; for he had it in his mind.  To avoid  beating  about  the bush,  
a day was appointed  for  the initiation  and I sent for my princes  
- friend  in the palace.  She also sent back that I should  come  
there.  I went.  It was there  that we planned  all our activities.  The 
type of cloth  to be worn  on the initiation  day, the people  to be 
entertained.  The king  also invited  me and gave  me the key of his 
house  in the town  as a present.
“The day of my initiation  was memorable.  The king spent  
a lot on me. In accordance  with the town ’s tradition,  someone  
to be initiated-  must walk round  the town on the morning  of 
the initiation  day and prostrate  for the sellers  of various  goods,  
including  yam sellers,  plantain  sellers and maize sellers, I 
dressed  up early in the morning;  all the palace  messengers  
followed  me as I prostrated  all over the town.  I later swore  not 
to be malevolent  to the king and  the people  of the town.  That  as 
the second-in-command  to the king,  I would  always  counsel  him 
to act rightly.  I would  make  the progress  of the town  supersede  
all my thoughts.
“Next, in respect  of the town ’s custom,  I rode a horse  
round  the town and those I had prostrated  for now prostrated  
for me, 'honouring  me. All those things  were done,  by me. I 
wore  a gorgeous  agbada,  rode a horse,  and put on a fashionable  
cap which  made me look like an important  chief The young
members-of  the palace  stood  behind  me. The queens  were also 
dancing;  My girlfriend  hired  her own  band  separately.  She really  
supported  me*to  celebrate  the occasion.  When  I got to the central  
market  square  and she danced  openly,  I sprayed  money  on her 
-a pound  changed  to two and one shillings  was spent  for her at 
once.  All the people  of the town  were  addressing  her as my wife  
during  the celebration.
“The girl and I continued  our relationship  and I made  up 
my mind  to tell her that I wanted  us to marry  each other. I was 
reluctant  to tell her because  her disagreement  could spoil our 
friendship.  I sent to her one day that she should  pay me a visit.  
That was deliberately  done to create  a forum  for me to open  
up. After I  had sent to her, I started  thinking  on how I would  
express  myself  to her on her arrival.  I was not sure of what to 
say. I then entered  my bedroom,  rehearsing  what I, would  tell 
her. I soliloquized,  this is how I would  begin:  Tfepade,  let’s live 
the-way  your father  and mother  are living  in the palace. ’ That  
was not good enough  to me. I then decided  to express  it in a 
better  way thus: Tfepade,  I have something  to tell you. I want  
you to marry  me. ’ That expression  sounded  ineffective  to me 
again;  I then decided  to put it this way;-Tfepade,  I want you 
to let us end our friendship  somewhere  and make something  
concrete  out of  our friendship.  I want  you to be my wife. ’ That  
one sounded  fairly  better  to me. I then  thought  for a while  again  
that it should  be better  expressed  thus: Tfepade,  I want to tell 
you an important  thing  today;  something  that I have never  said 
before.  I want you to let us make something  productive  out of 
our relationship.  Let it be done  this way: Let’s become  husband  
and wife like our father  and mother.  That expression  appeared  
too long to me again,  so I should  put it thus: Tfepade,  I want  to 
marry  you. ’
IREKE  ONIBUDO






“My friend,  Ifepade  came and  the process  of my mental  and 
physical  rehearsals  of  what  to tell her. I was confused  and became  
uncoordinated  when  she came  in because  of her question,  ‘ Why  
did you send  for me to visit  you?  I told her to sit down.  After  she 
had.  sat down,  I started  talking,  like a stammerer,  saying  ‘I-I-I-  
I-I lo-lo-lo-lo-lo-ve-ve-ve  yo-yo-yo-yo-yo-yo-u-u-u-u,  Ifepade:  
that was all I could  say till she stood  up and said she was going  
if I had nothing  to say. She went  away.
“After  her departure,  I thought  that the best  thing  was to put 
all I had  in mind  in writing.  That,  I thought  would  suspend  my 
shyness.'  So, I wrote  her a letter  thus:
Alupayida
December  11,1946  AD
My Dear  Ifepade,
L think it is high time  we talked  about ourselves.  You ’ve 
known  who I am and I’ve also known  who you are. I wrote  
something  in my tetter  to you sometimes  ago that as the heart  
is to the cock,  so you are to me; that I can do. nothing  important  
without  you.
So, I want  you  to let your  father ’s wish  to give  me a daughter  
for marriage*  become  a reality  between  you and I. I mean the 
joyful  day that  both of us will be living  together  as husband  and 
wife should  be agreed  on. Such an occurrence  will bring me 
great  joy if you think  over  it and give me a favourable  and  joyful  
reply.  How  are you?
I am affectionately  yours,
ireke  Onibudo
“The tetter was sent by me at dawn  the next day but she 
failed  to reply  till evening.  Consequently,  I went to the palace.
IREKE  ONIBUDO






Her  mother  told me she went  out but I waited  for her. She smiled  
to me as she came  in. She was yet to sit down  when  I asked  her, 
‘Did you receive  my letter? ’ She  laughed and  said, ‘Why  are you  
overzealous  about  it?’ I responded,  ‘Why  shouldn’t I?’ She then 
said my letter  would  be replied  the next day. In accordance  with  
her promise,  she replied  me the next  day. The content  went  thus:
Alupayida
December  11,1946  AD
Dear  Ireke  Onibudo,
I have  thought  deeply  over  the letter  you wrote  to me and I have  
agreed  to your request.  But, I want you to come and see my 
mother  in the evening.  She is really  eager  to see you.
Yours,
Ifepade
“The reply  was brief  but it brought  me some  tiding.  In the 
evening,  I went  to her mother  as she requested.  When  I arrived  
there,  I prostrated  fully  to greet  her and she responded  cheerfully.  
After  greeting  me, she instructed  that a seat  be brought  for me; it 
was done.  The wpman  and I entered  a room.  She then began  to 
talk to me thus:
‘Ireke  Onibudo,  this girl informed  me about  your  request.  I 
interrogated  her and she said she has agreed.  I have  also agreed  
and optimistic  that  her father  will agree.  I hope  you can still recall  
what he told you on the day you killed  the pernicious python.  
But I want to tell you one .thing  before  the commencement  of 
your affair. I don ’t want,  you to marry another  woman  after  
my daughter  because  of the bitter  experience  I have had with  
my rivals  in the palace  here. Had it not been for my children ’s ' 
sake, I would  have divorced  their father. So, put this in your
IREKE  ONIBUDO
mind  because  "she my  first child.  If a rival-wife  smiles  to you, 
the venom,  of a snake  occupies  hen heart. If you also want  to 
enjoy  your  life, stay  away  from  women; caution  your  eyes.  Your  
lifetime  would  be enjoyable  if you can do that. You and this girl 
would  love each  other.  She is also  a responsible  child.  Numerous  
men have tried to win her love but she refused.  You are also a 
good  person.  We can never  forget  you. Your  good  gesture  to this 
girl will forever  remain  in the memory  of her father  and I. So, 
keep all these  pieces  of advice  in your left hand  to prevent  you 
from  eating  with it’
“Those  were  the pieces  of advice  from  her and I responded  
thus: T am grateful  to you for all you ’ve said. May you live 
long. I am also critical  about  marrying  many  wives.  The idea 
has been in my mind since'  my youthful  days. So, do not fear 
that at all. My mind  is not in such  a thing.  A wife  brings  joy; two 
wives  bring two problems;  three wives  bring three problems;  
numerous  wives  bring  numerous  problems.  I would  be contented  
after marrying  this one. But-I  want to ask you a question,  Ma: 
How  I’m I going  to tell  the king about  this matter?  I don ’t have  
anyone  to send  to him in this town. ’After  saying  that, she smiled  
and said, ‘There  are many.  There  are numerous  ones.  "Whenever  
Ifepade  is less busy, she will take you to the house  of a king ’s 
friend.  The man is very  close  to me; he’s also well loved  by me. 
Send  him to the palace  to help you tell her father  that you would  
love to have  her as a wife. ’
“That was how we ended our discussion.  Later, when I 
wanted  to leave  the palace,  she called  Ifepade  to take  me to where  
she had earlier  talked about.  She followed  me. Sometimes  later,  
Ifepade  took  me through  a route  that led to a house.  We entered  
the house;  it was rectangular  in shape  and a horse  was tied to
its entrance.  When  we entered,  she greeted  all the women  there.  
They  knew  her very  well;  they  were  all cracking  jokes  with her. 
After  greeting  them, she entered-a  room and instructed  me to 
wait outside.  She remained  inside  for a moment  and later called  
! me in. I saw a relatively  old man  when  I got inside. I  prostrated  to greet him.  He quickly  reacted  that I should  not greet  him in such  
a manner  because  of my position  as-the  second-in-command  to 
the King.  We cracked  some  jokes  before  he spoke  thus; T have  
heard  about  what you wanted  to tell me; I understood  it very  
well,  rhave  understood  all. My child,  Ifepade  has told me. I will 
go and see the world-owner  (king)  tomorrow.  Who would  not 
feel happy  about  this in the whole  town?  You did a -marvelous 
thing  for us. You liberated us  from  the destructive  python.  I met 
it in the world  and it has been  killing  people for  a long time. ’
“After  saying  this, he started  greeting  us repeatedly,  ‘You 
are welcome,  you are welcome,  hello, hello... ’ He later called  
one of his wives  and conversed  with her quietly.  She entered  
afterward  and gave  us six pieces  of  healthy  kola  nut. We received  
them  and stood  up. He sent his greetings to  Ifepade’s mother.
“We left the house  when  it was getting  really  dark. Ifepade  
told me to proceed  to my house  but I refused.  So, I accompanied  
her to the palace  and told  her mother  the outcome  of our visitation  
before  returning  home.
“At dawn the next day ’s morning,  the man went to the 
king ’s palace  as promised.  He sent for me at about 10 am and I 
responded.  On getting  to his house,  he said the king  had  joyfully  
agreed  to give his child to me for marriage.  I visited  thfe king  
thereafter  to express  my appreciation.  The girl and I engaged  
each other  in a romance  that is so difficult  to come  by between ' 
couples  of today.
IREKE  ONIBUDO

“We visited  each other  daily. She  would  visit me if I didn’t 
visit her. We ate with the same  spoon;  if she took a spoonful  of 
rice and beans  from the plate and put it in. my mouth,  I would  
eat part of it and put the remainder  in her mouth.  If she also 
ate part of a morsel,  the rest would  be put in my mouth;  If she 
was indisposed  and there was.mucus  in her nostrils,  I would  
be responsible  for its removal  and vice versa. I washed  her 
feet whenever  she wanted  to go out and she washed  mine also 
whenever  I wanted  to stroll  out. We held each  other  by the hand  
in our strolls.  We ate similar  things;  we wore the same type 
of clothes;  and we used similar  chewing  sticks.  If a stone hurt 
me, she would  deliberately  hurt herself  with a stone.  If she was 
also hurt by a stone,  I would  also consciously  sustain  injury  by 
hitting  my feet against  the stone.  We kissed  seventy-two  times  
daily amounting  to an average  of six times per hour. I recall  
some  funny  things  we did when  in love.
“One day, we went  to the farm  together  and got to a stream.  
It was not deep but muddy  and a small  plank  was placed  on it 
for passage.  When we  got there,  I carried  Ifepade;  trying  to cross  
over with her on the plank.  As I stepped  on the plank,  my feet 
slipped.  Both  of us fell inside  the mud and carried,  each other  to 
the palace  in that appearance,
“On another  occasion,  we climbed  a hill to the peak. As we  
were descending  at the opposite  side, with her at the front,  she 
slipped.  I held her to prevent  her from falling  down  but I also 
slipped.  We both  fell down  and rolled  continuously  down  the hill 
falling  on each other  in quick  succession:."
“We loved  each other  dearly.  If I climbed  a tree, she would  
also do so. There  was a time she travelled  out with her father.  
Alupayida  was bounded  with the town they went to by a big
river but I swam  across  the river every  morning  and returned  
to Alupayida  before twilight.  She would see me off to the riverbank,  greeting  me as I swam across.,  After crossing,  our 
communication  would  still continue  until my ears lost contact  
with  her voice.
“That  was how  we used  to exchange  love.  After  a while, we 
agreed  on a day to tie the nuptial  knot. We started  preparations  
for the great  memorable  day. Her father  purchased  four hundred  
cows;  eight  hundred  rolls of clothes;  one thousand  tins of palm  
oil; six rooms  were filled  up with yam tubers,  six rooms  were  
filled  up with maize  cobs; six rooms  were filled  up with beans;  
six rooms  were filled with cowpea;  and six rooms  were full 
of melon.  Other  items included  one hundred  bags of salt, one 
hundred  ^d twenty  bags of pepper,  and hundred  and forty  bags  
of onions.  All the kings  and the chiefs  of the neighbouring  towns  
and villages  were  invited  to the wedding  ceremony.
“But my friend, conception  is for man,  execution  is for God.  
Lavish  as the preparations  for the marriage  ceremony  were, it 
never  came  to pass.  The  malevolent  people  of  the world  foiled  our 
plan. It happened  thus: whenever  I visited  the palace  and night  
fell, her mother  would  tell me to sleep  there.  The room  given  to 
me to pass the nights  was near the bedroom  of the queens;  and 
some  of them  remained  naked  when  preparing  the king ’s food.  
The king  was not aware  that I used  to sleep  in the  palace.  Later,  
the detractors  went to inform  him that I was sleeping  with his 
queens.  On a particular  night,  I was in the room with Ifepade  
when  the king ’s voice suddenly  came to my hearing.  We kept 
quiet; nevertheless,  he continued  to move towards  me. I hid  
among  some  sacks  of palm  kernel  kept  there  and told Ifepade  to 
go out of the room.  The king entered  my hidden  place  amongst
IREKEONIBUDO






the palm kernel bags after her departure.  He kept on looking  
for me there.  A little while  later, my head  was touched  by him;  
he looked  inside  and saw me. He furiously  dragged  me out and 
ordered  his messengers  to gite me severe  beating.  They  obeyed  
with the whole  energy  in their  body  system.  My back  was hit on 
the floor;  I was nearly  beaten  to death. After  the assault  he told 
me that I would  be relieved  of my chieftaincy  title  and publicly  
flogged  seven  days from  the day I was caught  with  the queens.
“My fiancee  became  so sad about the incident;  she wept  
through  the night: T came back to my house in the night. I 
anticipated  her visitation  on the next day but she behaved  
contrary  to my expectation.  Not knowing  that she had gone  
to the town elders  to report  her father  to them and tell them  to 
advise  him not to make  real his threats.  I sent a message  on the 
third day that she should  try to visit me but her conspiratorial  
step mothers,  who planned  the unfortunate  incident,  acted  as an 
impediment  between  her and the messenger.  On the fourth  day, 
her father  stopped  her from  moving  out of the palace.  She wrote  
me a letter  but the person  she sent failed  to deliver  it because  he 
was also a party  to the conspiracy.
“Before  the dawn  of the seventh  day, I packed  my bags and 
baggage  and ran out of  Alupayida  without  telling  Ifepade.  I was even cursing  her as left  the town.  I wrote  her a bad letter  but 
she was unable  to get it. I then  wrote  another  one, worse  than  the 
first. This is what  I wrote  in the second  one:
My hated  Ifepade,
I think  it is high time  I talked  to you. Ifepade,  it’s hightime,  
it’s hightime.  You- are like a shameless  human  being  and God will  judge  between  you and I. What  are women ’s thoughts  about  men other  than lost and  like, a  rock  behind  them  in the period  of 
affluence  and repudiate  him like when  a young  beast runs,  off 
from  a lion in the time of crisis,  pack  away  their  belongings  for 
your  personal  use; and-enjoy  wealth  feeling  elated  in gorgeous  
dresses;-rollicking  in the midst  of famous  people.  You are like a 
venomous  green  snake  under  the green  grass. The viper  that  bites  
one’s leg. One,  who initiates  a brawl  and stands  aloof So you 
women  are. But, you Ifepade,  what  are you boasting  of? Is it not 
your  father?  What  is the worth  of both of  you?  What  does a man 
want  front  you?  You are worthless,  useless,  shapeless,  senseless,  
careless  and unreasonable.  You go everywhere,  perhaps  you ’ve 
gone  out with  another  man.  You and  your  father  should  continue  
with your mischievous,  behaviour.  Even  if you are still interested  
in me, I don ’t want  you again.  I have left you and your foolish  
father.
It’s me,
Ireke  Onibudo

“My friend,  the most  surprising  thing  was that she wrote  at letter  to me the day I wrote  her. She was ignorant  of  my departure.  Her letter  was not received  by me and. she, didn ’t receive  mine  
but it was when  we re-united  (after  a long time which  I will talk 
about  later)  that we saw all the letters  we wrote  to each  .other  on 
the day we parted.  Her own letter  was much  different  from  mine.  
It was written  thus:  \
December  31,1946  AD
My Dear  Ireke  Onibudo,
My Ireke Onibudo,  your name is related  to sugarcane  but 
you are sweeter  than it is. You are the snail, I’m the shell; the
snail can t do without  the shell; the shell can’t do without  the 
snail. Since the day of that unfortunate  incident,  I have  not been  
able to see you. I can’t even say' whether  I am  .dead  or alive. I 
have  not eaten  for the past  three  days.  How  would  I eat when  my 
lover  cannot?  How  would  I drink  when  my lover  cannot?
My heart has become  disturbed  like a polluted  stream.  I 
am now apprehensive.  Sorrow  has become  my cloth because  
of him. Who could  replace  my lover?  Who could  act like him? 
Ireke  Onibudo  has hit me with his arrow  for a long time and the 
venom  of it has poisoned  me. My lover  is like a fragrant  luxuriant  
fresh  flower  that attracts  everybody,  ireke  Onibudo,  you should  
not forget  that love is like a delicious  food  on a farm difficult  to 
reach.  Getting  to such  a farm  is always  full of difficult obstacles  
- difficulty  of ups; difficulty  of downs;  difficulty  of innumerable  
giant  trees on the way. But whoever  overcomes  these  obstacles  
and gets into it has both terrestrial  and celestial  peace.  So, let us 
feel happy.  My lover,  I will visit you tonight.
' I am ever  yours,
Ifepade

“After  she had sent the letter  to me and learnt  that I had left 
the town,  she just packed  her load without  anyone ’s knowledge  
and left also. She left with a little amount  of money  without  
any knowledge  about my destination,  following  a route she 
speculated  I took. She also swore  at the town ’s gate never  to 
return  there  except  in my company.  She was going  towards  the 
east while  I was  going  towards  the west,  becoming  farther  from  
each other  as we moved  further.
“After  she had walked  for seven  days without seeing  me.
she settled  down  in a town  because  she had ’ run out of rnoney. 
She started gathering  firewood  and fetching  water for sale 
mentioning  my name  day and night  as she sold. In my journey,  
I continued  mentioning  her name, calling her multifarious  
derogatory  names  and cursing  her.
“She left the town she first arrived  in. In her journey,  she 
got to a forest  pervaded  by the lion ’s roaring  at night. She met 
numerous  famous  people  that wanted  her hand in marriage-  but 
she disagreed.  She always  told them  to help search  for her Ireke  
Onibudo.  That  was  during  my  wanderings.  I would  spontaneously  
soliloquise  about her name saying, ‘Foolish  Ifepade,  stupid  
Ifepade,  problematic  Ifepade,  worthless  Ifepade;  senseless  and 
stubborn  child. ’ I also turned  to a tramp.  My sojourn  in each  
town  was not longer  than three  months.
“Ifepade  was writing  various  things  about  me in pamphlets  
during  her  journey,  distributing  them  to young  children  in all the 
towns  she found  herself  She wrote  this in a pamphlet.
Ireke  Onibudo,  a good-natured  man 
Ireke  Onibudo,  a handsome  man 
Ireke  Onibudd,  an important  famous  man.  
ireke  Onibudo,  a man of wealth
Ireke  Onibudo,  a man as fresh  as the banana  tree on a river-  
bank.
ireke  Onibudo,  a man as powerful  as a lion 
ireke  Onibudo,  a man as wise as a serpent  ' ^
Ireke  Onibudo,  a man as gentle  as a dove  
■ JIaaa!  ireke  Onibudo,  my lover,  when  will I see you?
IREKE  ONIBUDO

Find  him for.  me; find my Ireke  Onibudo  for me.
Help me to take care of him; help me to take care of my 
Ireke  Onibudo.
Honour  him for me; help me to honour  ireke  Onibudo.
“One day, I stumbled  on one of the natives  of Alupayida  town  in another  town ’s market.  He told  me, that Ifepade  had left
home  to search  for me. 'the man  was my neighbour Alupayida.  He explained  further  that she left the town  around  the same  time  
I did. And I met  him six months  after my, departure.  I became  
excited  when  I heard  his words  that no one was aware  of where  
Ifepade  wept.  I then set out to search  for her from  town  to town.
“Ope  day, I saw a boy with  a pamphlet  in a_ settlement.  Some  
moments  later,  he dropped  it on the ground.  I picked  it and-rOad  
through.  I unexpectedly  game  across  my names  in it thus:
And it is this world  that Ireke  Onibudo  is?
Who  like,  the water  in a gourd  is his manner?
Whose  handsomeness  is -like the antelope ’s?
Whose  whole  head  is a repository  of knowledge?
A man of ideas  
A man of comfort  
A man of affluence  
A man of  joy 
A man  without  problems  
' A man supported  by God 
In vain are human  trials  
They ’ll never  overcome  my Ireke  Onibudo.


“After  1 had read  it, I quickly  ran after  the boy  that dropped  it 
on the ground.  I found  him and asked  where  he got the pamphlet  
from.  He explained  that he got it from  a female  palm  wine  seller  
on her way back from the farm she always  went to purchase  
palm  wine.  In as much  as I never  thought  that Ifepade  could  be 
selling  palm  wine,  I discarded  his words,  yet I knew  she was the  
writer  because  I knew  her handwriting.  My mind  ticked  that we 
would  soon  meet.
“After  walking  further,  I met another  boy with a -similar  
pamphlet.  I called  and asked  him how  he got it; he answered  that 
a female  palm  wine  seller  within  the neighborhood  distributed  
it to people.  On hearing  this, I went  there. When  I got to the front  
of the house,  I asked  for the woman  and.  I was told she was in. 
On observation,  I discovered  that the frontage  walls  were  full of 
my names,  I then implored  them  to call the woman  for me. She 
turned  out to be Ifepade.
“My friend,  one difficult  thing in this world is knowing  
how  someone  feels;  whether  he is sad or happy.  So, it would  be 
uneasy  for you to perceive  the magnitude  of our happiness  as a 
result  of the reunion.  We could  not even  express  it. She narrated  
the suffering  she went through  and how she swore never to 
return  home  except  in my company;  how penurious  she became  
to the extent  that she resorted  to selling  palm  wine.
“The girl related all those occurrences.  Her narration  
brought  more sadness  to my heart; I then told her to stop it. I 
went further  to say she-should  be untroubled  by the problems  
of poverty  for I had some  amount  of money.  I told her tablet  us 
go at once  to purchase  new clothes  because  all her clothes had  
become  rags. We went and bpught  various  clothes  and agreed  
on the day to wed in the town. We played  with each other  till
evening  but I slept  in my host ’s residence  while  she slept  in the 
house  I had earlier  met her.
“I went  tahfer  house  the next morning.  Surprisingly,  I met 
her father ’s guards  who said they were able to find us after a 
three month  search. The king wrote in his letter that Ifepade  
and'I  should  return  home to tie the nuptial  knot, and that his 
annoyance  with me had subsided.  After much thought,  we 
decided  not to follow  them  but they  begged  us to do so for their  
sake  because  the king  had vowed  to kill them  should  they fail to 
bring  us back. I thought  over it and convinced  Ifepade  that we 
should  follow  them.
“We travelled  by sea for several days before  we got back  
home.  We had  earlier  sent a message  to inform  the townspeople  
about  our arrival.  So, we were  received  at the harbor  by a lot of 
people  and many-queens  were sent by the king to welcome  us. 
The reunion  of Ifepade ’s mother  with her brought to  her mind  a 
great  joy.
“We proceeded  to the palace  to greet  the king.  After  that, I 
went  to stay in my former  house  and she stayed  with  her mother  
in the palace.  The former  house  presented  to me by the king  had 
been  lavishly  decorated.  Thick  mats and rugs were  spread  on its 
floors.  Feathers  were put in the cushion  mattresses  on my bed 
and chairs.  All the plates  and cups in the house  were made of 
silver.  The whole  building  was decorated  with  flowers;  the doors  
were  as smooth  as the surface  of a mirror.  The whole  place  was 
glittering;  the whole  house  looked  beautiful.
“I slept  in the house  till the next day. At daybreak,  I went  to, 
check  Ifepade  in the palace.  When  I arrived  there,  her eyes  were  
red from weeping.  I felt disturbed  by the tears on her eyes. I 
greeted  her but she reluctantly  replied.  All the letters  I wrote  her
IREKE  ONIBUDO



in my fury had been given  to her. She said, ‘I have received  all 
your  letters;  when  she said this, I became  downcast  and took  her 
to the bedroom  and prostrated  fully  to be^ her. I so much  begged  
her to forgive  me*  saying  that the letters  were  written  due to my 
ignorance  about  her whereabouts.  I wiped  off the tears on her 
face with  a handkerchief;  she smiled  and we played  further.
“She later  complained  of headache  and chill. I quickly  made  
fire for her and rubbed  her forehead  with some ointment.  She 
then laid down  and slept off while  I returned  home  to eat.
“I went to the palace  in the evening  and met her playing;  
she had already  recovered.  But on the next day ’s morning,  I 
heard  a knock  on my door. On peeping  but, I saw someone  sent 
from  the palace  by Ifepade  to fell me that she was  unable  to sleep  
throughout  the night.  I quickly  followed  the messenger.  She was 
given some curative  medicine  that aided her recuperation  but 
she could  not come  out until a week  after.
“Her  relatives  told  me to prepare  for our  wedding  a few days  
after her recovery.  I did not want  to do so because  she looked  
emaciated.  I did not want her indisposition  aggravated  by the 
restless  preparations  of marriage  ceremony  but when the king 
invited  me and reiterated it,  I concurred  and we got married.
“My friend,  her sickness  resumed  six days after she came  
into my house;  it was so critical.  She called  me two months  after  
and tearfully  said, ‘My husband,  I am very sure that I’m going  
to die of this ailment.  It is so painful  that our romance  would  end 
this way. What  a pity!  ’ ^
“I became  terrified  after  her utterances.  Tears  dropped  from  
my eyes.  I told her to stop her bitter  responses,  as there  would  be 
no problem.


“Ifepade  gave up the ghost at noon the next day. I was 
hot from head to toe; I wept bitterly.  I became  lost in a heap  
of confusing  thoughts.  'When  lain in state, I laid with her and 
covered  myself  with her burial  clothes  because  my thought  by 
then was to be dispossessed  of my heart  by a tragedy.  I became  
apathetic  to life, seeming  ais if I had nothing  in the world.  The 
king and her mother  broke  down  and fainted  at once when  they 
heard  of her death.  They  were  resuscitated  tong after! She was so 
much  loved  by the king.  She was his first daughter  - so famous.
“All the town  people  wore  black  clothes  and followed  her 
silvery  casket  during  the burial.  The arrangement  for the burial  
procession  went  thus: her. corpse  was to be buried  in the palace.  
All the town  people  were  to gather,  lined  up for procession  and 
followed  the casket  from  my house  to the palace.
“The young  children  lined  up at the front  of the coffin,  her 
(Ifepade)  female  friends;  her mother ’s friends  and relatives;  
the chiefs and I followed  the casket  respectively.  I continued  
weeping.  When  we got to the palace  and laid her in state, I 
cried  loudly  and became  overtaken  by emotion  on recalling  her 
conducts.  I looked  at her and mourned  thus:
‘Ifepade,  Ifepade,  Ifepade,  my dearest  lover. This is how 
your  moon  turns to darkness  in the daylight!  Human  life is full 
of tribulations  and tears, sorrows,  problems  and serious  pains.  
Ifepade,  like a drama,  you went and turned  me to a sorrowful  
man in the world.  I have  been  ruined  because  you were  my gold  
and silver.  The gold has been spoilt;  the silver  has been lost. I 
have lost a clean  love. A cool-headed  lover  has made  the world  
a hostile  abode  for me. My lover  and I have been  pushed  to an 
irritating  gorge.  Our love has been severed  in the middle  like 
a thread.  But, what is a man?  The heart is man. The flesh,  the
bones  and the veins  that form the body system  become  useless  
whenever  the heartbeat  stops. Ifepade  can lift her limbs no 
more.  Conversation  has evaded  Ifepade.  Ifepade  has crossed  the 
St5or. The famous  has queen taken away by death. One whose  
position  no one can take. But, death,  what is your thought?  A 
merciless  creature  you are death,  the enemy  of all men in the 
world,  the enemy  of trees in the forest,  the enemy  of the fishes  
in the oceans,  the enemy  of the birds in the sky. Death,  today,  
my enemy  you are. Carried  away by you is my Ifepade!  My 
Ifepade,!!  My dearest  Ifepade!!!  I’m tired of living  because  of 
you. I have fallen  in love with  heaven. ”
“That  was how  the woman  died  and I clad  myself  in sorrow  
in Alupayida.  I became  disinterested  in the town  after  her death  but the subsequent  occurrences  prevented  my departure.  The king himself  did not want me to leave the town.  He increased  
his love for me and eventually  sent me to an important  journey  
of which  I will speak  later,  but the after effect  of her death  kept 
on haunting  her mother  for a very  long  time. She wept  whenever  
she saw me.
“I have to tell you about a thing that surprised  me and it 
happened  this way. During-the  lifetime  of Ifepade,  one of her 
step-mothers  didn ’t want me to marry  her. She hated  me as a 
result  of this. Whenever  I visited  the palace  and greeted  her, she 
replied  icily in spite of the fact that her daughter  was friendly  
with  Ifepade.  They  loved  each  other  and always  moved  together.  
But after  the death  of Ifepade,  the woman  became  friendly  with  
me, visiting  my house  on the third  day of  her death.  Her  daughter,  
who was a friend  to Ifepade,  was sent. Her name  was Ifepinya.
“The woman  herself visited  me in about  three days after  
but I became  highly  surprised  by her utterances.  She spoke
thus: ‘Behave  courageously.  There  are still people  in the world;  
princesses  are still there. If .you are interested  in any other  
princess,  there are still others. ’ A month  had not passed  by after  
Ifepade ’s death  when  she was saying  this. It was surprising  that 
someone  could  be-discussing  marriage  with  me by then.  I looked  
at her without  replying.
“Later;  she was sending  her daughter  to me regularly.  The 
girl would  sometimes  arrive  at my place  before  I woke  up-from  
bed to give me various  gifts. The gifts were so much-  to the 
extent  that  became  suspicious  that she wanted  to seduce me for  
marriage;  more  so that the mother  wanted  me to marc  her but I 
did not want  anyone  to discuss,  marriage  with me. I regarded  it 
as a bad behaviour  for a stepmother  to be-luring  me to an affair  
with  her daughter  after  the death  of Ifepade.
“Another  observation  was that whenever  the mother  ’of 
Ifepinya  visited  me, she discussed  about  Ifepade ’s mother.  One  
day, as she sat down,  the statement  that came  out of her mouth  
was, ‘Has your relative  come to condole  with you since your  
bereavement? ’ I then asked, ‘Who? ’ She replied,  ‘Who again  
do I mean  if not your mother-in-law? ’ I did not respond  to the 
statement.  I kept  mute. She knew  that what she said didn’t go 
down  well with  me. Her next speech  was, ‘Ireke  Onibudo,  don ’t 
you go out at all again?  You ’ve not been,  to the palace  since  
the death  of Ifepade?  Like Ifepinya  that has been visiting  you; 
you’ve not reciprocated  her visits;  even  once. Though  we know  
that there is no love lost between  you and your mother-in-law,  
what  about  us? Aren’t we visiting  you? ’
“After saying that, I reacted  thus, ‘I will continue  to 
remember  the house of Ifepade ’s mother,  even when other  
people ’s houses are forgotten  by me because  she was so
hospitable  to me during  the lifetime  of her daughter, She  hosted  
me with yams; she hosted  me with pounded  yam;  "she  "hosted 
me with com meal;  she hosted  me with meat.  Ifepade ’s mother  
is a very responsible  woman.  I will come to greet her but the 
sorrow  of the death of Ifepade  has beclouded  my whole  heart  
as the heaven  overshadows  the land. This has not allowed  me 
to think  of going  to greet  my in-law  in the palace,  Greet  her on 
my behalf.  She ’aa woman  of high esteem.  She should  never  be 
stigmatised;  she should  never  be stigmatised. ’
“My  friend,  the heart  of  rival  wives  are darker  than  charcoal;  
as dark as the midnight.  Their  minds  are full of irritants.  There  
was an occurrence  in the palace  within  the time the woman  
started  visiting  my house.  Her bedroom  was beside  Ifepade ’s 
mother ’s. She was an ardent  lover of charms.  Several  times,  
one could  .meet her at the meeting  point of three routes  if one 
kept late nights,  sometimes  naked.  Ifepade  and I had met her 
that way before.  She prepared  a charm  arid poured  it in a bottle,  
and whoever ’s body it touched  would  be afflicted  by leprosy.  
She brought  the charm  to the house  on the day it was prepared  
with  the aim of pouring  it on Ifepade ’s mother  in her sleep.  She 
kept it on the shelf,  laid down  but never  thought  she could  sleep  
off. Hardly  had she lied down  than she slept off. In the night,  
a fidgety  cat hit the bottle  of charm  kept on the shelf  and it 
poured  on her as it fell. She became  a leper  before  dawn  and her 
fingers  started  cutting  off. That  was how she ruined  her own life. 
I was  told by the man who prepared  the charm  for her.
“The king ordered  her out of the town when she' became  
a leper; her house was built in the forest to prevent  her co­
existence  with people  in the town. Her life turned from  
sweetness  to bitterness;  as bitter  as bitter  leaf. Still, her child.
Ifepinya continued to visit me. I became  unfriendly  to her 
but she remained unmoved.  On some  occasions,  I would  try to  
"keep  her off by going  out and telling  her I had somewhere  to go 
immediately  she entered.  I stopped  responding  cheerfully  to her 
greetings  and rebuffed  her interrogative  speeches. I felt repulsive  
of her presence  because  she was a close  friend  of Ifepade  before  
her death.  So, it looked  odd to me for her to start seducing  me a 
few days after  her death.  That  is how human  beings  are. No one 
is to be trusted  except  oneself;  the world'  is full of hypocrites.  
One ’s friend may be an enemy  that derives  joy from one ’s 
downfall  and becomes  sorrowful  over one ’s progress.  God is 
the only one that is totally  reliable.  Only a. handful  of human  
beings  are reliable;  many  are treacherous.  Whatever  they say in 
one ’s presence  differs  from  what  they  would  say when  one is no 
more around.  Their  utterances  , are sometimes  at variance  with  
the conception  in the deepest, part  of their  heart,  ifepinya  was a 
worthless  person.  -

“Her visit’to my place  became  irregular  as a result  of my 
hostility  to her. Eventually,  she became  my fierce  enemy  for if 
a girl is trying  to win the love of a man but the man doesn’t 
reciprocate,  her hatred  for him would  be as irritating  as feces.  
She would  be maligning  the man. She would  be despising  Tiim;  
her heart  would  be as dark  as a thickly-coloured  dye. It would  be 
full of poison  like snake;  she would  be experimenting  so many  
ways  to kill  him.
“One day, a lizard emerged  from the plate in which  my 
food  was served  by my housemaid.  It happened  just as I wanted  
to raise up the first morsel  into my mouth  because  I had been  
empowered  with  a divine  charm  by my mother.  So, if a poisonous  
charm  was add to my food, a lizard  would  run out of it. After  
the occurrence,  I pounced  on my housemaid  and flogged  her
severely,  telling  her to confess where  she got the  poison  she 
added  to my food. That reaction  brought  about  her confession  
that it was Ifepinya  that gave  her. On asking  her, she told me that 
it was still remaining.
“I sent to Ifepinya  to visit  me on the second  day and she did. • 
When  she arrived,  I instructed  my housemaid  to add some  of the 
poisonous  charm  into the food  prepared  for her. Hardly  had she 
eaten  two morsels  when  she developed  stomach  disorder.  I told 
her to proceed  home  when  she was rolling  on the floor.-  She was, 
killed'by  the stomach  disorder.  But her death  brought  sorrow  to 
the king  again  for two daughters  were  lost by him within  a short  
time - the second  one died as he was mourning  the death of- 
Ifepade.  The king was psychologically  traumatised-by  the tragic  
occurrences.  He fell ill and emaciated.  Whoever  saw him would  
know  that he was troubled. ”

Chapter  6
Itanforiti  Who  Lives  Underground
“Three  months  after the death  of Ifepinya,  I was, one morning,  
invited  to the palace  by the king.  On getting  there,  he spoke  thus:
Ireke Onibudo,  you were invited  here by me. You are the 
only one I could invite in such a manner  in the whole  of this 
town  because  no one but you can do what  prompted  me to call 
you. An elephant  can only be found  in the forest;  a buffalo  is 
only  found  in the savannah;  your  type  could  only  be found  in the 
heavens.  I want  to send you to a mysterious  man. The journey  
will take you almost  two months  before  returning.  Nevertheless,  
I want  you to go on my behalf  I am sending  you to Itanforiti  that 
resides  under  the ground.  He is a herbalist  as well a sage. His 
herbal  medication  and wisdom  are unrivalled.  I want  you to go 
there  purposely  to collect  the herbs  that would  cure my ailment.  
I have  been  unhealthy  since  the death  of my daughters;  I hardly  
stroll  out, that is the first assignment.
‘The second  assignment  is more important  than the first.  
You should  go and learn more  wisdom  on behalf  of this town.  
The way things  should  be rightly  done and the way to bring  
much  peace  and prosperity  here.  These  two things  are important  
amongst  human  beings.  A town without  peace can’t enjoy  
wealth,  and a town  without  wealth  has incomplete  peace.  What  
peace  is in the house  of a hungry  man?  Those  are the things  I 
want  you to do for me. Ireke  Onibudo,  I am not skeptical  at all 
that you will bring  me honour  by doing  those  things  for me.

“When he finished  speaking,  I responded  thus, ‘Your  
Highness ’, what  power  does a goat  have  in its owner ’s presence?  
Could  a horse be wiser than its owners?  Abomination!  I can 
not reject  your assignment;  I cannot  do so; I must not do so. 
In as much  as I remain “here, I have to go wherever  you send  
me. But, there  is one thing  you should  know.  I think  the journey  
would  involve  a great preparation  because  a man who lives  
underground  is a creature  of no mean  power.  As a result  of that, 
I want  you to find two or three  people  that would  go with  me and 
I want them chosen  amongst  the herbalists.  Though  they were  
unable  to cure your  ailment  one,  who is knowledgeable  in herbs  
is different  from  one who is fully  ignorant  in it. Those  were  my 
words.  Your  Highness,  may you live long. ’
“After saying  that, he acquiesced  to my counsel  by saying  
that  I should  be responsible  for the choice  of  the worthy  herbalists  
for the journey.  On the third  day, I summoned  a meeting  of the 
herbalists  and spoke  to them  thus, ‘I welcome  you all. I invited  
you for an important  thing;  we’ve got an important  assignment  
to do for this town. The king delegated  me to tell you about  
it. I hope you must have heard about Itanforiti  who is more  
knowledgeable  in herbs and wiser  than everyone  in the world  
- it is to him we are going.  We are going  there to learn more  
wisdom  that  will transform  this town  from  development  for super  
development;  fame  to super  fame and make  peace  the dividend  
of all the natives.  Secondly, we would  be taught  more,  medicines  
by Itanforiti  through  which  more development  would  come  to the town.  What  is to be done now is to sit down-and  decide  on 
the number  of people  to go, the names  of the people  to go, and 
the day to go. You are welcome. ’

“After my address,  they unanimously  agreed,  that the 
journey  should  be made  and that three,  of us should  go.' I was.  
the leader.  The other  two appointed  included  a man known  as 
Ero-okan   and another,  one called  Kumofehinti.  Ero-okan  was 
not a native  of Alupayjda.  Although,  He was a sojourner  but he had established  himself  there. He was a wise man. Contrarily,  Kumofehinti's name  is a synonym  of insubordination  because  he 
was too stubborn;  He was a native  of Alupayida  - the child of a famous  man but he was a troublesome  person;  an incorrigible  element.
“I had told the king about the outcome  of our meeting.  
Several  herbalists  came to my house.  I sacrificed  one hundred  
and twenty  pigeons  ^t the meeting  point “ of three roads; I 
sacrificed  sixty doves  at my backyard;  seven  hundred  cuts of 
incisions  were made on my head. I sacrificed  nine goats,  nine 
sheep  and nine ducks  to make my journey  nice and smooth.  I 
also prepared  food for numerous  children  in my house  to pave  
way for blessings.  I sacrificed  to the wizards,  the witches  and the 
spirits.  A day was later  appointed  for the commencement  of the 
journey.
“My companions  had also prepared  like me. We went to 
the palace  for valediction  and consultation  on the day preceding  
our departure.  The other  two people  slept  in my house  till dawn  
and we embarked  on-the  journey  at cockcrow.  I got hold bf the 
divine  sword  given  to me by my mother,  sheathed  it Ind hung  it 
on my shoulder.   kept  a doubled-edged  knife  in his bag 
while  Kumofehinti  carried  a club as a weapon.  Those  were our 
weapons.
“The,  route  to be followed  by us was not wide. We would  
trek on it to the house  of Itanforiti  in a whole  month.  We would
trek through  the forest  containing  wild beasts  and phenomenal  
creatures  to be encountered  by us.> All these  were foreknown  by 
us.
“The foodstuffs  to be eaten on our journey  were packed  
inside  our bags but there  was a heavy  downpour  on the day we 
left home;  it almost  deafened  us. All the plants  were extremely  
cold. There  were pools of water  on the way and our legs were  
dirtied  by mud. The clothes  on us became  wet; we were  caught  
by serious  cold and we were gnashing  our teeth. Water  was 
falling  on us as the wind blew.  After  trekking  for a while,  we 
saw a giant  tree that fell on the road. We had to enter  the forest  
to create  an alternative  route but where  we entered  was full of 
thorny  frees  that inflicted  severe  injuries  on us.
“That  was the only  problematic  occurrence  encountered  on 
the day we left home.  We were  trouble-free  for some  days after  
that; On the seventh  day, we got to a high mountain^  called  the 
Mountain  of Tribulations.  It was a dangerous  mountain  having  
a surface  as smooth  as a polished  wood.  The mountain  wasn’t 
stationary;  it moves  forward  and backward,  pushing  us left and 
right in our ascension.  I almost  somersaulted  like a monkey  in 
the process  of climbing-  the Mountain  of Tribulations.  It later 
became  inflamed  from the ground  level and Continued  burning  
towards  us. In as much  as w& could  not hurriedly  ascend  it, we 
had to leave  ourselves  at the mercy  of death.
~“We were later told by Ero-okan  that we were being  troubled  by the pantheon  of the mountain.  I turned  my face 
skyward  and supplicated  to the Almighty  God to rescue  us 
from the entanglement.  We were not wicked  to anyone  and we 
harboured  no malevolence  against  anyone  in our destination.  I 
meditated  thus, ‘The heavenly  God that created  the trees, the
plants,  the insects,  the Animals  and made  we human-beings  their  
custodians.  Please,  extinguish  the-fire  below  us, lock the door  
against  the sorrow  that wants  to visit us. Challenge  the devil  
on our behalf.  Extinguish  this fire from  ,below.  God quench  it, 
quench  the fire. The creator,  quench  it, quench  the fire. The 
marvelous  one,, quench  it, quench  the fire. One-who-acts-as-  
he-says,  quench  it for us, do not let us perish  on this mountain.  
Disallow  the Mountain  of Tribulation;  from blotting  us out of 
existence.  Guide  us to our destination;  guide  us back  home. ’
“That  was my prayer.  Some  moments  later,  we observed  that 
the fire was subsiding  and we continued  to ascend.  We later got 
to its peak  but rather  than becoming  weaker,  we were stronger.  
We could  even climb  two more  mountains  as high as that.
“We  proceeded  on our  journey.  On the sixth  day, we arrived  
at a town.  It was different  from  all the towns  I had earlier  .been. 
The difference  was that it lacked  women.  We met only >men.  
The title of their  king was Gbayegborun  because  he travelled  to heaven  daily.  The settlement  was an exponent  of how the world would  have  looked  like without  women.  If anyone  of the natives  
wanted  a child,  he would  inform  Gbayegborun  and give him his picture.  He would  take the picture  to heaven  and return  with a child  made  to look like the sender.  But I observed  that the love 
between  .children  and their  parents  was little; the children  were  
rude to their parents  because  of the cheap  way they got them.  
They did not value  children  because  they were not responsible  
for their production.  God bestows  great honour  on mankind  
by endowing  them with procreative  ability.*  That means  God 
allows  them  to contribute  to man ’s creation.  But, one other  thing  
observed  by me in the men ’s town  was that they were  barbaric.  
Some of them were running  around  in the town with apron ’s 
while  some  moved  about  naked  in their  homes.
“I was also startled  to discover  that the residents  were  poor  
due to their inability  to work.  They  prepared  food,  took care of 
their  homes,  fetched  water  and did other  domestic  Works  meant  
for women.  But, there  was much  more  unity  in the town  than I 
anticipated  however  they did not interfere  much  in each other ’s 
private  lives.  They  were  contented.  Even  if twelve  of them  were  
living  together,  there  would  not  be much  interpersonal  wrangling;  
nevertheless,  there used to be occasional  disagreements  that 
quickly  resulted  in physical  combats.  Any development  of such  
nature  ended  in series  of injury  or total death.
“Another  observation  I made  was that they were  too noisy. 
They discussed  in harsh and high tones; their laughter  was 
usually  deep. None of their actions  was simple.  Their  dancing  
was rigorous;  they also involved  themselves  in hard plays,  
pursuing  and beating  each other. Though  they were friendly  
but their friendliness  was devoid  of the love that usually  exists  
between  a man and a woman  during  courtship  - the love that 
intoxicates  like wine,  blindfolds  like palm  wine,  and severs  the 
eyes of a man and a woman  from  the realities  of life.
“But the town was very clean. Various roads were  
constructed  and cut clean. Every  one of thein got hold of his 
broom  to sweep the frontage  of his house at daybreak  but 
their household  items  were not arranged.  Everything  would  be 
scattered  and roughened,  chairs  were carelessly  arranged;  caps 
were indiscriminately  hanged  on walls;  and yet, .they were too 
forgetful.
“Their  food  was palatable  but their  soup  was not delicious. I 
concluded  from  my observation  in the town  that if there  Were no 
women  in the world,  it would  have  been  an uncomfortable  place.  
Things  would  have  been  too tough  and nothing  would  have  been
available  to soften  them;  man ’s beauty  would  have  remained  in 
oblivion;  people  would  have been  indifferent  to. cleanliness  for 
if there were one thousand  men without  women they  could  be 
walking  about  naked.
“We left the town on the third day and purchased  some  foodstuffs  for the journey.  We later got to a settlement  called  
Irewesi  Forest  where we encountered  a lot of suffering.  We were suddenly  covered  by sudden  darkness  that impeded  our movement  Our lamp was doused  as soon as it was lit yet we 
heard  the voice  of  the spirits  as they  communicated.  One of them  
even carried  light on his head and walked  towards  us. He-later  
disappeared  and reappeared,  behind  us. Our ignorance  of-his  
passage  petrified  me. A little while  later, we got to a relatively  
light  area  but as soon  as we got there,  we looked  at the  front  and 
saw a single-homed  goblin  charging  towards  us. Ashe  appeared,  
he spread  out his two hands  as if to encircle  us to prevent  our 
escape.  We were  terrified. All  of  us were  looking  at each  other ’s 
faces in a dilemma  of whether to run for our dear lives or give 
him a challenge.
“Kumofehinti  spoke  first and volunteered  to fight with the spirit. He charged  frontally  and we followed  him. The spirit walked  towards  us. When  he nearly  met us, he said, ‘Who are 
you?  What  do you rely on? Where  are you coming  from?  Where  
are you going?  You ’ve met problem  today.  You ’ve come into 
contact  with trouble.  You ’ve clad yourselves  in trouble.  You  are 
captured  by sorrow.  You are assailed  by danger,  you’ve walked  
into the mouth  of a famished  road. Today  is a day of trouble.  
Today  is your end. Today  is your last day of seeing  sunrise.  
You ’ve entered  a trap, you are all  going  to be killed  and eaten  by 
me. ’

“We didn’t react to his utterances  but prepared  ourselves  
for the battle  ahead.  Kumofehinti  attacked  him first. I had never  
witnessed  such a tough physical  combat.  Kumofehinti  acted  
strongly  and the goblin  reacted  fiercely  and stubbornly.  When  
he got hold of Kumofehinti,  he started  pushing  him towards  a 
rocky  place  to hit his head  on it but he quickly  freed  himself  He 
lifted  up the right  leg of the spirit  and the spirit  was limping.  He 
later  got hold of the neck  of Kumofehinti  and pressed  it together  
with  the aim to kill. A long  time after  that,  Kumofehinti  removed  
his hand  from  his neck and threw  him forward.  On landing,  the 
goblin  turned  his horn  frontally  to stab him  to death.  He strongly  
rose up  his club  and hit the goblin ’s head. The  spirit  felt a serious  
pain and staggered  backward.  That  was the time I removed  my 
sword  from  the scabbard,  moved  furiously  towards  the goblin  and 
struck  it on the head.  He was deeply  cut but water  was rushing  
out instead  of blood.  I struck  him repeatedly  as Kumofehinti  
clubbed  him further.  He later fell down and disappeared.  He 
fell before  our eyes but we were ignorant  of how he went into 
oblivion.
“Five days after  we left the settlement  of men,  we arrived  at 
the women ’s town  where  there was no single  man. The title of 
their  king was Heavenly-bird.  The  procedure  of their  procreation  
was similar  to that of men. Those  seen by me did not preserve  
themselves  as expected  of women.  Many  of them  moved  about  
naked  in their  houses.  All  of them  did not wear  upper  garments.  
They acted indifferently  whenever  the wrapper^  fell off their  
bodies,  retying  them openly  on the streets.  But surprisingly,  
we observed  they did all what men do. Their farms were  big 
and ,well-tilled,  with growing  yam tubers  bulging  out of the 
heaps;  maize  plants  developing  cobs, and grains  and cowpeas  
producing  grains.  They  played  like men, engaged  themselves  in
sports  and games,  jumped  about,  rode  horses,  and climbed  trees.  
They  were  more  fashionable  and sociable  than men but fond of 
scandalising  one another.  Out of those  we met, hardly  was one 
that didn’t malign  someone.
“Surprisingly,  their  houses  were  not as clean  as anticipated  
by me. The reason  was that they didn’t have time for domestic  
chores  since they also did work meant for men. The whole  
town was overtaken  by weeds; and it appeared  they were  
overstressed.  Though  their  clothes  looked  clean  but their  rooms  
were overfilled  with personal  belongings.  They  packed  a lot of 
things  in preparation  for a journey,  both bag and baggage  that 
were observed  by me in our host ’s house  where  we witnessed  a 
journey  made  by a woman.
“But they were easily frightened,  always  afraid  to move  
out alone  on a slightly  dark night.  Many  of them  feared  killing  
snakes,  however  small.  Nevertheless,  a few of them  could.  They  
were  prone  to tears.  A little  occurrence  could  make  an elder  weep  
bitterly  but they were merciful.  If anyone  of them  encountered  
a problem,  she would be visited  and consoled.  There' were  
stubborn  ones as well as gentle  ones among  them.'  I observed  
how they used their  housemaids  as if they wanted  them dead;  
however,  some did so as their parents  by assigning  them what  
they could  do and giving  them'  nutritious  food.
“They  had flexible  laws and usually  disrespected  the law 
enforcement  agents. Laws were broken  with impunity  and 
they usually  picked  quarrel  with whoever  corrected  them. But 
the town was good for something  - they were all devoted  to 
their religious  beliefs.  Christians  went to churches  regularly;  
Muslims  attended  mosques  punctually;  and the traditional  
worshippers  went to worship  in their shrines  always.  None of
them was an unbeliever.  When  I compared  my observations  
there  with  those  of the men ’s town,  I concluded  that the creation  
of men and women  into the world  by God is an act of wisdom.  
Men  and women  are like the bones  and the flesh of human  body  
respectively.  The flesh is useless  without  the support  of the bone  
and vice versa.
“We left the women ’s town  after three days and continued  
our journey  to the abode  of Itanforiti.  We trekked  for nine days  
without  any mysterious  experience  but on the tenth  day we got 
to a place  called  the ‘Sacred  Forest ’ - it remained  a day for us to 
reach  our destination.
“The Sacred  Forest  was so horrific,  there  were  big trees on 
both roadsides;  their surroundings  were cleanly  swept.  It was 
devoid  of birds and beasts  and it was quiet like the midnight.  
We saw a man on the roadside  and greeted  him. He replied.  We 
then waited  to witness  what he was about  to do. He planted  a 
seed before  our eyes; it germinated,  matured  and bore fruits  in 
our presence.  Some  moments  later, the fruits were falling  and 
breaking.  When  the first one fell and broke,  a snake emerged  
from  it and bit the planter;  he started  groaning.  When  the second  
one broke,  it turned  out to be seven  scorpions,  biting  him. When  
the third  one broke,  a lion came  out of it and killed  him.  After  the 
lion had eaten  to its satisfaction,  the fourth  fruit fell and broke,  
a man came  out of it and packed  the carcasses  of the dead  man,  
buried  them  and nailed  a notice  to his grave.  In it the following  
words  were written:  ‘This man planted  a seed of wickedness  
and reaped  fruits of wickedness;  he thought  evil about  another  
person  and  became  destroyed. ’
“After  we had continued  our journey  for a while,  we say/ 
another  man  who took  and planted  another  seed in our presence.
IREKE  ONIBUDO
It germinated,  grew up and bore fruits.  Later,  a fruit fell down  
from  its top and broke.  As it broke,  a young  child  came  out; as he 
came  out, he faced, the  man, bowed  to him and said, ‘You took  
care of me when I was sick sometimes  ago, I become  yours. ’ 
The second  fruit fell and broke;  another  young  man came out 
of it, faced  the man and bowed  to him,  and said, ‘You helped  to 
free my parents  when  they were indebted  to people;  I become  
yours. ’ The third  fruit  fell and broke,  a young  man  emerged  from  
it; he faced  the man and said, ‘You spent  a lot of money  for me 
during  my school  days;  I become  yours.  ’ Each  of those  boys  later  
climbed  the tree and plucked  a fruit.  The first one hit his own on 
the ground  and a mansion  emerged.  The second  one hit hi? own 
on the ground  and it produced  uncountable  domestic  animals.  
The ground  was full of boxes  of golden  currencies,  silver  and 
diamond.  They  afterwards  faced  him and said, ‘These  were the 
things  planted  by you; Goodbye. ’ They  were swallowed  up by 
the open  ground  as they said so. That  was how they entered  the 
ground.  The man  started  carrying  those  things  to somewhere one 
by one while  we continued  our journey.
“After some moments,  we met a girl that wore a white  
attire. She greeted  us and we replied.  Having  replied,  we told 
her we were  going  to the residence  of Itanforiti  and implored  her 
to show  us the way if she knew  it. She reacted  thus, ‘The sons of 
man, the residence  of Itanforiti  is not too far  from  here but you 
have  to employ  wisdom  to reach  there.  Your  problems  are solved  
once  you get there  for he is a merciful  creature;  however,  getting  
to his place  is the only  problem.  You will soon  get to the junction  
of heaven.  You will see the way to heaven  on the right hand,  
and you’ll see a man in a white  dress there.  If he asks whether  
you are the people  of the heaven  or the world,  reply  that you are
from the world.  You’ll be seeing  several  people  going  towards  
the heaven;  you mustn’t greet  them  nor answer  their greetings.  
Their  weight  will be taken  as they  get on the road;  and thereafter  
collect  papers  from the man on the road — those are the papers  
in which  their sins are written.  They  are used to judge  them in 
heaven.  You must be careful  about  the songs of the heaven ’s 
people  or else you might  be tempted  to follow  Heaven ’s way.
‘On leaving  heaven ’s junction,  you’ll be seeing  the flying  
bees; you shouldn’t kill them if they settle on you because  an 
attempt  to kill one would  make  all of them sting you to death.  
When  you get to the residence  of Itanforiti,  you ’ll see a banquet  of luxuriant  beautiful  flowers;  proceed  to where  they are plenty.  
There you will  see an underground  route manned  by a python  
that watches  over the residence.  Hold its neck cautiously  and 
put it aside;  do not attempt  killing  it. I think  I have said enough;  
I can’t remember  any other  thing  again.  May  your  creator  guard  
and guide  you. ’
“So the girl spoke. We thanked  her and continued  our 
journey.  We later  observed  that the forest  we were  going  through  
was becoming  more  fear-evoking.  Our fright  increased  and our 
hearts  were  beating  like the engine  of a vehicle.  The trees  around  
engendered  more fear in us, for they were all white  as if they 
were robed  in white  clothes;  they were also seemingly  mobile.  
When  we trekked  for a while,  we got to the  junction  of heaven  at 
which  we saw a-great multitude  of people  collecting  evaluation  
papers  from  the white-clothed  man.  ^
“On getting  to him,  he interrogated  us thus, ‘Are you people  
of the world  or the heaven? ’ We answered,  ‘We are the people  
of the world. ’ He queried  further,  ‘Do you want  to become  the 
heaven ’s people? ’ We also responded,  ‘No, we want to remain
of the world. ’ He countered,  ‘Leave  here! ’ We then departed.  
My observation  was that the things  used to design  heaven ’s 
route were like innumerable  well-arranged  stars - glittering.  
It could  blind  one if looked  at for long. I was unable  to watch  
the route yonder.  We continued  the journey.  After walking  
about  six feet further,  a song that sounded  like a man ’s voice,  
snowballing  to a melodious  bell-jingle  was heard  by us. I waited  
for a moment,  being-magnetised  by it. Looking  back, I nearly  
returned  before  Ero-okan  held me back. Ero-okan  and I were  
calling  on Kumofehinti  but he was adamant.  He went  to meet  the man at heaven ’s gate; he was weighed  and given  a paper  before  
our eyes. He was told not to go to where  the melodious  song  
was emanating  from  but to a left hand  side;  he entered  the forest.  
Eri-okan  and I -waited  for a long time without  seeing  our third  companion.  We later  continued  on our  journey.
“We continued  moving  on the road  with  the Sacred  Forest  on 
the right.  We left the forest  in the evening.  We saw several  bees  
after leaving  there; they were hovering  around  us and getting  
on our bodies.  We did not kill any of them;  so none of us was 
stung.  We later left them.  We slept  under  a tree when  it became  
dark;  we were  tired and heavy  as a result  of Kumofehinti ’s loss. We proceeded  on our journey  on the second  day after  breakfast  
and arrived  at the abode  of Itanforiti  in the afternoon.  We saw 
various  types of glittering  plants  measuring  up to ten acres in 
breadth  and width.  We then noticed  and went to an area with  
dominant  glitters.  There  was a locked  door on the ground  with  
a big snake  placing  its head on it. Ero-okan  was the one that quietly  used his hand  to hold its neck  and carry  it aside.  Having  
done  that,  we opened  the door  and saw some staircases  that went  
towards  the ground;  we started  descending  the steps.

“On getting  down,  we got inside  a big palace  and saw a 
beautiful  girl. She instructed  us to stop bn seeing us and we 
obeyed.  She came  to us and said, ‘Are you spirits  or men? ’ We 
replied,  ‘Men.  ’ She questioned  further,  ‘Why  did  you  come  here? ’
I answered,  ‘We’ve come  to see Itanforiti;  the king  of  Alupayida  
sent us to him;  so, if you know where he is, tell us.’ After  saying  
that, she said: ‘Human  beings  are dangerous;  many  of them  are 
treacherous;  they  can go to any place  for discovery;  they  can use 
their  intelligence  in various  ways.  Some  of them  are inquisitive  
about  the success  of others.  Once he discovers  that, he starts  
to disrespect  him and eventually,  pulls him to a bottomless  pit. 
Human  beings  are perilous.  Let me enter  the house  to inform  my 
father,  Itanforiti,  who will then consult ’with the spirits  whether  
you are free to see him or not. ’

“Having  responded,  she entered  a room. Some moments  
later, we saw numerous  birds coming  out of the room and 
hanging  on the walls  before  us. They  later  flew  back  to the room.  

The young  girl came  out later and told us to follow  her in. We 
obeyed  -and entered.  We observed  that the place was very big 
and we saw Itanforiti  op a high seat. He was a fearful  man. His 
head and trunk  were human  but his legs were like a cow ’s; he 
was bald-headed;  and the few strands  of hair at the edge of his 
head  had turned  grey.
“He smiled  on seeing  us and told us to draw  near him. He 
then gave  an instruction  that seats  should  be brought  for us to sit 
at his front.  After  we had sat down,  he welcomed  us us, ‘You 
are welcome,  you are welcome,  and you are welcome  from  the 
troubles  and dangers  on the way. How  was,  your  encounter  with  
the Mountain  of Tribulations?  Hope  you learnt  some  lessons  in 
men ’s "town? Hope you noticed  some things  in the women’s
town?  How did you pass through  the- heaven ’s way? Did their  
songs, not  attract  you?  You are welcome,  you are welcome  from  
the up and down  movements  of the world.  Hello,  the children  of 
Oduduwa,  the lineage  of Okanbi  from  the East.
‘I am ItanforitL  I have been in the world  for a long time,  before Oduduwa  brought  the Yoruba  tribe to their present  settlement.  The  wisdom  given  me by God  is much.  I go to heaven  
in an interval  of eight  days  to honour  God; There  is nothing  one 
wants  in the world  that he won ’t get if one trusts  in the Almighty  
God. I had seen you before  you left your king ’s palace.  I had 
known  about  your coming*when  the journey  started.  I am not 
ignorant  of what you were coming  to do. I’ll do everything  
for you before  you leave here. I want you to go and eat now 
for nothing  should  be allowed  to supersede  the eradication  of 
hunger.  Follow  my child  now to where  you'll  eat. ’
“When  he finished  his speech,  the young  girl that took us 
there  told us to follow  her and we did. She took  us to a room-at  
the northern  side of the house. We were  served  a meal  of grinded'  
com and stew with pieces  of meat.  The stew was delicious  and 
it was surprising  that they could  prepare  such a palatable  stew  
there.  She didn’t speak  harshly  like before  when  we were  eating.  
Instead,  she was playing  with  us, asking  questions  about  various  
•things.  She asked  about  our town,  how peaceful  it was and how 
far it was from  their  settlement,  and we replied  all the questions.
“When  we finished  eating,  we went  back  to Itanforiti  who told us to follow  him for the familiarisation  tour of his house.  

We saw a python  with human head  in the first room. If spoke  
to Itanforiti.  After  they had exchanged  greetings,  he introduced,  
us to it as his guests.  On asking  whether  we were  human  being  
or spirits,  we told it we were human  beings.  It hissed  and told
1-20 VIREREONIBUDO


Itanforiti  to take us away  because  human  beings  are the worst  antagonists  of snakes  amongst  all living  creatures.  We left the place and Itanforiti  continued  his introduction.  He later took  us to another  room  that was completely  decorated  with silver. 
We saw several  statues  of beast cast with silver  in the room.  He 
warned  us not to touch  any of them  for if we did, we would  turn 
to the real  animal  whose  statues  we touched.  As he told  us this,  he 
touched  the statue  of a deer and he turned  to a long-homed  deer. 
The deer entered  the next room  to that and metamorphosised  to 
Itanforiti.  We enquired  about  the importance  of the statues ’ room  
and he explained  to us that his household  members  used it to 
change  to animals  whenever  they wanted.  In doing  so, anyone  
of them  Could  change  to a. lion to go and hunt  animals  for them.
'“After  that,  we got out of the room  and entered  another. The  
one we left for was completely  made  of glass.  Itanforiti  took  us to a section  of it and instructed  us to squat  to observe  the glass.  
In our observation,  we saw a giant spherical  object;  we could  
not see its totality  because  it was too big. A giant chain  hung  
it in the sky and-someone  was pouring  oil on it from above;  
He then asked  us whether  we knew  what  we’d observed  but we 
responded  negatively;-He  then explained  thus: Tt is the world,  
hanged  there at the middle  of the world  and heaven  by God.  
The man  you ’ve seen pouring  oil on the chain  is one of God ’s 
servants  that manages  the world.  He oils it to prevent  its fall and  
breakage.  The chain  you ’ve seen can’t be detected  by ordinary  
eyes;  it can only be reflected  by that glass. ’
We left the room  after  we had observed  the mirror  for some  
moments.  He took us to his backyard  where  we saw, various  
small  plants  having  an admixture  of deeply  greenish  fresh  leaves  
and beautiful  flowers.  He instructed  us to stop on getting  there
and spoke  thus:  ‘These  plants  exemplify  and remind  me of the 
inequalities  in the creatures  of  God.  The most  attractive  amongst  
them contains  venomous  leaves.  Any animal  that consumes  it 
will die; any man that consumes  it will also die. The second  
flowerless  and thorny  plant  beside  it has good  leaves.  It can cure  
all aliments  in the world.  It can cure leprosy,  smallpox,  epilepsy,  
and guinea  worm.  It can also serve  as one of the ingredients  of 
a curative  herb. Observe  that the fruitless  tree at the edge of the 
garden.  It was brought  by me from heaven  and I planted  it at 
my backyard.  It was after  much  passionate  pleas  that my creator  
allowed  me to bring it. It has ever since borne  a fruit which  I 
plucked,  ate and consequently  became  immortalised.  The only  
thing  required  of  whoever  eats it is to go to the house  of Ogodogo  to wear  the garment  of immortality.  New comers  from heaven  wear  their  clothes  there  because  the house  of Ogodogo  contains  various  clothes  - garments  of immortality and  mortality.
‘You human  beings  are also of a different  nature  in the 
world.  God does not endow  people  with equal  qualities.  Some  
people  are gifted  with the power  of elocution  and everybody  
would  find  their  way of speaking  appreciable.  Some  are deficient  
in oratorical  ability  but good in rational  thinking;  some are 
beautiful  and attractive  to everybody;  some  are ugly and hated  
by all; some  are extremely  tall; some  are short  like stumps;  while  
some  have modest  height.  God endows  people  according  to his 
will. ’
“When  he finished  speaking,  he told us to enter  Tor him 
to show us where we would reside till our departure  time.  
He allocated  different  rooms to Ero-okan  and I. His room  was opposite  mine. I saw two silvery  chairs  and a golden  bed 
having  a big mattress  in my room. I saw seven  birds with an

unprecedented  beauty;  they started  singing  as. I entered  and sat 
down.  Their  voice  was so mellifluous  to the extent  that I fell into 
an  involuntary  slumber  as the night  approached.
“On waking  up at night,  I met a red velvet  garment  and a 
trouser  on my body. Some  goblins  having  human  heads  and cow 
legs were dancing  round  my bed. After  dancing  for sometime,  
they started  clapping.  They  later  lifted  my bed and I. On getting  
to the sky, I observed  that they  had lifted  up Ero-okan ’s bed and drew it close  to mine.  Our beds were returned  to our respective  
rooms  when  we were about  to start conversing.  That was how 
they were  carrying  us up and down  till they  were  dispersed  by a 
sounding  bell. The garment,  cap and trousers  on me disappeared  
as they dispersed.
“I peeped  out and discovered  it Was getting  to dawn. I went  to see Ero-okan  in his room;  we agreed  to go and inform  Itanforiti  at daybreak  about  the night ’s incident.  We informed  
him at daybreak  but his answer  to us where, Those  you saw  are all 
my children.  They  only came  to entertain  you. ’
“We did nothing  on the second  day. We only strolled  round  
the house  till dusk. We were served  palatable  supper  - a meal  
of pounded  yam with pepper  soup that,  contained  many  pieces  
of meat.  Those  seven birds  flew into my room  after the supper,  
singing  as they flew in. The songs  acted  as a harbinger  of sleep  
to me and I slept  off.
“I saw numerous  lamps in my room on waking  up but I 
saw no one. As I stood  up, a hand pulled  my hands  backward  
and severely  tied them  together  but the assailant  was seen  by 
me. After  that, the hand of the unseen  torturer  pulled  me with  
the rope,  dragging  me about  in the room.  After a  while,  the rope 
was removed.  I saw a hand that carried  my leg up and another
hand carried  me on his head.  As I was thrown  to a side of  my 
room,  I got to another  hand. I was ignorant  of the structure  of 
my torturers.  That  was how they continued  throwing  me to  each  
other,  r later heard  the sound  of a multitude  of feet in the room  
and saw a team of hands,  which  turned  me upside  down. On 
getting  to the air, I witnessed  how the hands carried  Opinion  
and placed  his feet on my own; his own head was touching  
the ceiling.  I tried  to shout  but my tongue  was crippled.  They  
continued  punishing  us in various  ways  from  night  till cock crow  
when  we were  returned  to our beds.
“We went  to report  all the unpleasant midnight  experience  
to Itanforiti.  He felt sad about it and said, ‘The people  of the 
world,  do not feel offended.  I have various  creatures  under  my 
roof  - the insubordinate  creatures;  the wicked creatures,  the bad 
creatures  but there are also responsible  ones amongst  them.  Do 
not be, troubled  by their actions;  I’ll caution  them. ’ After our 
breakfast,  we were  invited  to a very big apartment  by Itanforiti.  
He sat on a big seat placed  on a platform  at the northern  side of 
the room  but he instructed  us to sit on the lower  seats nearing  
and facing  his own and we did so.”

Chapter  7
^ Itanforiti  and the Various  Characters  of Man
“After  we had sat down,  he started  speaking  thus: ‘The king of 
Alupayida  sent you to me to acquire  wisdom.  Listen  attentively  as we talk on various  characters  that impede  man ’s progress. ’
‘Let us talk on covetousness.  What is covetousness?  It is 
the inability  to remove  one ’s eyes from another  man ’s wealth,  
another  man ’s house,  clothes,  money,  food, and  other  things.  The 
sin is like an insect  that destroys  people ’s root; that impedes  the 
velocity  of their  progress.  A covetous  man  introduces  veracity  to 
all things.  He is not contented  with his belongings  and derives  
no joy from them. Covetous  people  malign  other people  as a 
result  of envy  for their  high  position.
‘The sorrow  of a covetous  man  is much  greater  than  that of a 
bereaved  person  because  it doesn’t expire.  He’s always  interested  
in another  man ’s property.  Covetousness  does  not respect  status.  
A highly-placed  man may be covetous  of inaccuracy.  A king  
might  be covetous  of his aide ’s property;  and the town people  
might  be covetous  of their leader ’s possessions.  A young  man 
could  be covetous  of an elderly  man ’s wealth  and vice-versa.  
Nobody  is free from  this sin except  those  that have  self  restraint.
‘What causes  stealing?  Covetousness.  It is the behaviour  
that affects  robbers.  A child should  be taught  contentment  from  
his youthful  .stage.  A young  child should  not be begging  for 
food from others.  He should  be taught  that watching  someone  
eating  in anticipation  to be given  food is bad. Some children  ask
their parents  for money  every day to purchase  various  things  
possessed  by others.  Though  it is good  for a child  to have what  
others  possess  but there should  be modesty  in all things.  The 
parents  should  collectively  and strongly  fight the  bad behaviour  
in order  to fi-ee their children  from the ineptitude.  A child that 
is covetous  from his youthful  stage has laid the foundation  of 
his life on a muddy  riverbank.^  Such a life will never stand.  
Such children  grow up to become  polygamists  with numerous  
wives  .and women  that -accept  gifts from men indiscriminately.  
Their  lifestyle  is not exemplary  to the young  folks.  A man who 
garbs  himself  in covetousness  has been  imprisoned  by the devil,  
and anyone  in such a circumstance  has been deprived  of his 
manliness.  He has become  worthless.  Covetousness  always  
shines  like a scorching  sunlight*.  I would  now tell you a story  to 
show  you how  bad this character  is.
‘A fox and a pail  were  friends  who  jointly  had a trap. They  
planned  to be setting  it to catch  the animals.  On the first day of 
setting  it, it caught  a rat. When  they got there,  the snail spoke  to 
the fox thus, ‘Our  trap has caught  a rat today,  you may  carry  it. It 
will catch  a big rat tomorrow  and that is bigger  than an ordinary  
rat. ’ When  the fox heard  that, he said,  ‘I will wait till tomorrow;  
my friend  you should  have  this for yourself  ’ The snail  took  away  
the rat. True to the snail ’s prediction,  the trap caught  a big rat 
on the second  day. When  both of them  got there,  the snail said,  
‘Congratulations,  my friend,  the big rat is very  big but it cannot  
be up to the one fourth  of the-hedgehog that will be caught  by it 
tomorrow. ’ On hearing  that, the fox became  sad and kept mute  
for a while.  He later  said, ‘Truly  speaking,  the hedgehog  is very  
big; you ‘should  go with the big rat today.  I’ll carry  tomorrow ’s 
hedgehog, ’
IREKE  ONIBUDO

‘The snail went away  with-the  big rat. On the second  day, 
they went to check-the  trap and it had caught  a hedgehog.  On 
seeing  it, the snail called  the fox and said, ‘Come  here fox, the 
trap has caught  a big hedgehog.  You may carry it away. It’s 
tomorrow  I will carry  jackal;  a very fatty animal  that is much  
bigger  than hedgehog. ’-When  the fox heard that, he became  
confused  and later  said, ‘You can have  the hedgehog  to yourself  
The  jackal is a fatty animal.  I will have  it for my wife  to prepare  
soup  tomorrow, ’
‘On the next day, they went  to check  the trap. As expected,  
the trap had caught  a jackal  before  they  got there.  When  the snail  
saw  it, he spoke  thus,  ‘Congratulations,  look  at how  big the  jackal  
is. You are so lucky;  have it to yourself  There  is nothing  to be 
worried  about;  it is tomorrow  I’ll catch a deer; a mature  beast  
with long horns. ’ My friend;  the fox was a foolish  animal.  He 
became  troubled  on hearing  that and soliloquised  thus, ‘Should!  
allow  the snail  to have  the deer? Its meat  is almost  much  than  the 
meat of all the animals  we’ve been catching  ever since. Snail,  
you should  carry  the jackal.  I’ll-carry  the deer tomorrow. ’ The 
snail went  away  with  the jackal;
‘On the next day, the-trap  had caught  a deer as expected.  
When  they got there,  the snail spoke  loudly  thus, ‘Ho-o-o!  The 
deer!  An animal  with  red-and  white  skin;  the long-homed  animal  
has been  caught.  Fox, come  and carry  it but I’ll organise  a feast  
tomorrow  and invite  you to my house for the trap will catch  
a buffalo.  Buffalo  is bigger  than all these small animals. On 
hearing  this, the fox became  dejected. -He walked  for a while  
and stopped.  He walked  for a while  again  and stopped,  Remained  
quiet and stationary  before  speaking  thus, ‘Snail,  I have to  be 
patient  a little more;  allow  me to carry  the' buffalo  that will be 
caught  tomorrow.  Carry  away  the deer. ’

‘The trap caught  a buffalo  .the next day. The snail  was the 
first person  to-arrive  there to see it. He quickly-called  on the 
fox and when  he got there,  the snail said, ‘Congratulations,  my 
friend;  you are congratulated  on your success.  You ’ve caught  
the second-in-command  to the elephant,  of all  the-beasts  in the 
forest,  none is as big as the elephant.  It will be caught  by me 
tomorrow.  Have this to yourself.  The snail ’s reaction  created  
sadness  for the fox .because  the elephant  is the biggest  of all 
animals.  He thought  for sometimes  and told the snail to-carry  
away  the buffalo.
‘The trap caught  an elephant  on the next day. The.  fox,  had 
prepared  well for his catch when  they got there. But after the 
snail had watched  him for a long time, he said, ‘You shouldn’t 
worry  yourself;  the trap  will catch  tragedy  .tomorrow  und tragedy  
is ten times  bigger  than-the  elephant. ’ When the  fox heard  this 
and recalled  that all the predictions of  snail came  true, he left the 
elephant  for the snail and waited  for the animal  called  tragedy  
till the next  day.  After  the snail  had carried  the elephant  home, he 
came  back  ta change  the location  of the trap to the path passed  
through  by the prince  every  day.
‘The prince  was caught  by the trap as he was strolling  out 
on the next day. Everybody  was shouting,  ‘Who brought  about  
this tragedy?  Who brought  about  this tragedy?  On hearing  that, 
the fox ran out of his house  and said, ‘Where  is the tragedy?  
Where  is the tragedy?  I brought  it about?  I brought.it  about?  It’s 
mine,  it’s mine. ’ He was immediately  arrested  but when  he got to 
where  the trap was, he discovered that  it had caught  the prince.  
He quickly  changed  his-words that  he was not responsible  for the 
prince ’s death  but that the snail was. The snail  was arrested and 
condemned  ta death  as a result  of the consistency  and potency  of 
the fox ’s verbal  defense.
IREKE  ONIBUDO .

“On the day the snail  was  to be executed,  he wore  a gorgeous  
attire,  mounted  the horse and hired some  talking  drummers  to 
beat drums  for him. He instructed  them to be communicating  
with the talking  drum  thus, ‘Whoever  kills a prince  is the one 
given  a horse  by the king;  the snail killed  a prince  and the king  
has given  him a horse;  the-king  has given  him a horse,  the king  
has.  given  him a horse;  the snail killed  a prince  and the king has 
given  him a horse. ’ The snail instructed  the talking  drummers  
to be beating  the drums  .as they followed  him. He mounted  and 
rode the horse  to the backyard  of the fox’s house.  He instructed  
them to be drumming  repeatedly  and loudly  on getting  there.  
Immediately  the fox heard  the message  from  the drums,  he ran 
out of his house and said, ‘I now want to confess.  I want to 
confess  that,  I was- responsible  for the death of the prince;  so. 
I’m supposed  to ride the horse. ’ He went to the palace  at once  
and said that he was responsible  for the prince ’s death.  He was 
immediately  arrested  and executed.
‘That was how the fox ended  his life. He died because  he 
could  not remove  his eyes from another  man ’s belongings.  He 
wanted  all things  for himself;  he never  wanted  others  to have  
what he lacked.  He struggled  and struggled  till death.  That is 
how the world  is, my friends;  some  people  want  their house  to 
be magnificent  like a palace  but they would  not want  to follow  
a way as pellucid  as a sea route. Some would  be clamoring  
for other people ’s property.  His own would  become  valueless  
to him.  You should  let your  king understand that he has to wipe  
off covetousness  from  each  house  by discouraging  people  from  
being  covetous.  The law that will wipe it out should  be, made.  
A town  should  not be covetous.  It is like a thorn  in the sole that 
prevents  the owner  of the feet from running.  A covetous  town  
will never  progress  however  industrious  the inhabitants  are.

‘Let us talk,  about  another  thing. Let us talk about  pride.  
What  is pride?;Pride  means  placing  oneself  above  one ’s status.  
Either  it is conceived  in the heart,  spoken  or acted.  It impedes  
man ’s progress,  creates  downfall  and ridicules.  A proud  person  is 
always  belittled  by people.  Pride  shows  in one ’s little  behaviour.  
Let us talk about  greetings.  Some  young  people  don’t greet  the 
elderly  people  respectfully  nowadays.  If they want to greet an 
elderly  man  in a modem  way/  they  would  be the first  to stretch  out 
their  hands  for shaking.-They  no more  prostrate  to greet  elderly  
men in the traditional  way. Today ’s children  do not respect  their  
parents  again.  They  are always  reluctant  in carrying  out errands;  
assignments  are reluctantly  done by them. This behaviour  is 
irritating  and obstructs  one ’s progress;  young  girls should  be. 
self-disciplined  as they are growing.  Some of them regard  it 
as an act of civilization  to be addressing  their  mothers  anyhow.  
They  go out and come  back  at will and behave  arrogantly  when  
scolded.
‘How does one become  indebted?  It is as a result of 
pride. Purchasing  what one has no money  for/ for a man in a 
poor condition  to join the association  of the affluent  men; for 
a man having  one shilling  to start laying  the foundation  of a 
house  and then become  indebted  to people.  Whoever  is doing  
anything  beyond  his ability  is poisoning  himself  A responsible  
person  should  always  ruinate  over an action  before  it is taken.  
Some  women  are extremists.  They don ’t restrict  themselves  in 
purchasing  of dresses.  Many  of them wear club uniform  with  
worries  of how to  settle  the debt. They  won ’t have rest of mind  
after -leaving  the venue of the meeting.  They are like semi-  
spherical  calabash  that has problem  of stability.  They from  
pillar  to post.

‘An occupant  of reputable  position  should  mind  its actions.  
Numerous  .leaders  have fallen  through  pride.  Their  conception  
is that they have got hold of the handle  of a sword,  so they 
can use it the way they like. Such language  is well understood  
by their subordinates  who now become  deliberately  indolent  
to impede  the progress  of work.  The work would  continue  to 
retrogress  until  the leader  becomes  disrespectable.  It is good  for 
those  in authority  to know  the truth in an adage  that ‘authority  
intoxicates  like a spirit,  it intoxicates  like palm  wine  that makes  
one change  his character  from  that of a responsible  person  to an 
irresponsible  one who uses his position  according  to his whims  
and caprices. ’

‘You human  beings,  has God ever refused  to make  sun rise 
in a day for being-offended  or has he ever prevented  the moon  
from rising?  Yet, God is the custodian  of authority,  which  He 
has never decided  to use .wrongly.  Those  in authority  should  
be conscious  of the fragility  of their positions.  Leaders  should  
always  strive  to develop  their societies  through  their  behaviour.  
The princes  and the children  of famous  people  should  know  that 
however  influential  they are, they are under  God. A proud  man 
has garbed  himself  in the coat of downfall.
‘Several  people  have missed  their opportunities  through  
pride.  Uncountable  numbers  of women  have  missed  responsible  
husbands  as a result  of pride.  Some  people  would  despise  others  
as if they are not God ’s creatures.  They would  belittle  others  
from  head  to toe; some  don ’t greet,  yet they disregard  people ’s 
greetings.  They always  look for car owners.  Eventually,  they 
would  not be able to get a husband  with  a car; they  would not  be 
able to return  to the main they have rejected.  A giant  tree would  
fall on their  way.
‘Likewise  are men. Some  are looking-for  the daughters  of 
wealthy  people  as wives.  The daughter  of a wealthy  man  may  not 
show him  love during  courtship  but he would  still force  himself  
oh her. She Would  ultimately  pack  in as a wife. The day of her 
coming  would  signal the end of comfort  and peace  in his house-  
physical  brawls,  curses, and abuses  would  reign-supreme.  They  
would  always  be wrestling  in their  home,  maligning  each other  . 
and pursuing  themselves  with cudgels.
‘Proud  people  should  not be made  a companion  in a public  
place.  They  would  not place themselves  in positions  of humility.  
They scramble  for high positions  and contribute  more than 
others  in a public  debate.  They speak  wrongly  and rightly  by 
using  many  ways  to let people  know  they are knowledgeable  in 
all issues. A proud  man is the leader  of fools.  If not that a proud  
man is ignorant,  he would  have  known  that his behaviour  would  
make  him fall like a giant  tree. He would  become  downtrodden  
and despised-person  that  people  always  speak  bad of due to his 
changing  from  being  responsible  to being  irresponsible.
‘Proud  people  are like rootless  plants  that can’t stand for 
long because  they are ignorant  of their  ability  and small  stature!  
Their  thought  is that they are giants  but they are small. They  
would  have  retarded  growth.  Pride  is the forerunner  of downfall.  
It covers  one with a garment  of humiliation.  It creates  doubt  
in people ’s mind about  someone.  The behaviour  is a very bad 
stain.  I want  you to inform  the king of Alupayida  to find ways  of 
banishing  it from  his town.
‘There  is another  important  thing  that we have  to talk about?  
It is love. It is an' important  concept  in the world.  One cautions  
one ’s friend  about  love. A leader  without  love finds it difficult  
to succeed.  There  is deep love that is strong  and. shows  what
complete  love is. This is the love  between  a man  and his fiancee. It is the type of love that reflects  the ability  of love. One should  
be reasonable  in his love life despite-the  fact that love can make  
one endure  the worries  in one ’s heart and intoxicate  like palm  
wine.  I would  tell you the story  of a woman  I heard  of her love 
life - a true love.
Tt goes thus: There  was a rich, wealthy,  famous  and strong  
king. One day, his first male child  who doubled  as his heir was  
celebrating  his birthday.  So, several  people  were presenting  him 
gifts for the birthday  celebration  of the child. A certain  man 
brought  a gift of a wooden-horse.  When  the man brought  the 
horse,  he told the king that if a man mounted  it and turned  the 
small  wood  beside  its ear, the horse  would  fly skyward.  The king  
was surprised  and told the  man  thus; If  you are saying  the truth,  
ride the horse  in the sky to go and pluck  that leaf  for me.
‘The man mounted  the*  mysterious  horse as the king said 
that and manipulated  the small  wood  beside  its ear, he was taken  
to the sky and he plucked  the leaf for the king. The occurrence  
surprised  everybody.  The prince  celebrating  his birthday,  told 
the horse  owner  that he wanted  to test it. He at once climbed  it 
and manipulated  the Small  wood  beside  its ear. As he did that, 
the horse  flew skyward  .and took him off. When  he wanted  the 
horse  to return  back,  he turned  the small  wood  but the horse  kept 
going.  He wanted  the horse  to descend  but each  touch given  the 
wood  resulted  in further  acceleration.
‘The king became  angry  with the horse  owner and  ordered  
for his immediate  imprisonment.  He said he would  be freed  
if his child returned  but killed  if otherwise.  That was how the  
prince was  taken  off by  the horse;  with  him  left alone  in the sky. 
He started  ruminating  never  what happened  to him-as  the horse
continued  to move;  it flew till night.  Some moments  after  dark  
when  the moon  rose, he looked  at the opposite  side of the horse  
and saw another  mall  wood.  He twisted  it and the horse  started  
descending.  The prince  was making  the descension  with fear 
because  he was ignorant  of where  he would  land. He later got 
down  safely  but did not know  where  he was. He observed  that 
light came from a place. He -went  there and met a big palace  
which  he entered.
‘As he entered,  he saw several  women  sleeping  on the 
floor  and noticed  one that slept  on the most  beautiful  bed in the 
room.  She did not cover  her head,-including  her face. Her beauty  
bewitched  the prince;  he then  walked  quietly  to the bedside  and 
started  watching  her. She opened  her eyes soon after and saw 
him. She then asked,  ‘Who arb you?  Where  are you from? ’ The 
prince  answered  her thus, ‘With regards  to your appearance,  I 
know  you must  be a princess.  I am also a prince  but before  I tell  
you my life history,  I earnestly  beg you to And me something  to 
eat for I am so hungry. ’
‘That was the speech  of the prince.  The woman  woke  up 
and woke the household  members  to warm  their soup on fire. 
They  quickly  acted  according  to her instruction  and the prince  
ate. The woman  was truly a princess.  It was her father  that built  
the house  for her within  the forest  and gave her housemaids..  It 
served  as a relaxation  settlement  for her, especially  during  the 
dry season.
‘When  the prince  finished  eating,  he started  narrating  to the 
princess  how-he  was celebrating  his birthday  peacefully  and a 
man presented  his father  a mysterious-horse  which  he mounted  
without  having  the knowledge  of its use; how he left the town  
on it and how he was being  carried  about.  When  he mentioned
the name  of his  town  and the princess  told him the name  of the 
town  he was, he leant  he had made  a ten day trip away  from  his 
hometown.
‘The story baffled  the princess  and she greatly  pitied  him. 
She instructed  her housemaids  to prepare  a room  - it should be 
cleanly  swept;  a good  bed with  a comfortable  mattress  should  be 
brought  in; small  pillows  should  be placed  in the upper  region  of 
the bed; the whole  environment  should  be decorated.  All those  
things  were  done  by them and the prince  slept  there  till dawn.
‘The  next day, the princess  took care of the prince  as much  
as possible.  She gave  him chewing-stick  to clean  his teeth,  took  
him  to the bathroom  to bathe  and  prepared  delicious  food  for him. 
Both  of  them  ate on the same  dining  table.  They  were  playing  and 
cracking  jokes,  smiling  and shouting. When  they  finished  eating,  
the princess  told hint to follow  her for the familiarisation  tour of 
her mansion  and he did. They were moving  from one room  to 
another,  from  an apartment  to another,  from  the sitting  room  to 
the backyard,  enjoying  themselves.  The princess  told him not to 
leave  yet as they  toured  the mansion  and he concurred.  He forgot  
home  and the worries  of his people  because  of a woman.  The 
love of a woman  deafened  him; he became  a dog that disregards  
the hunter ’s whistling.  The princess  seduced  him through  her 
fanciful  acts. She was changing  to various  clothes  and shoes.  He 
became  obsessed  with  love and both  of them  were  coiling  round  
each other like snakes,  following  each other like ants, going  
into rooms  and coming  out of them.  The thought  of the prince’s 
return  was lost in them  and they soon  married.

‘Some days after, they planned  to go back to the prince ’s 
home  town.  They  prepared  and' packed  some  of his belongings  ' 
on the mysterious  horse.  They  mounted  it (the prince  was at the front  and the princess  was at the back  holding  him by the waist).  
He manipulated  “the small wood  beside  the horse ’s ear and it 
flew skyward.  They  faced  the prince ’s home  town and reached  
there earlier  than anticipated.  They did not head straight  to the 
'palace  because  he did not want them to  appear  to the king in 
such a manner.  He wanted  to inform  the father  first so that the 
town  people  would  welcome  the wife  with  pomp  and"  ceremony.  
Against  the backdrop  of his thought,  he initially  went to his 
father ’s villa and left the wife there before  proceeding  to the 
palace.
‘He was  warmly welcomed  back  on getting  to the palace  and 
his father  felt very happy.  He embraced  his child^  watched  his 
face and greeted  him.  Later  in the process  of their  conversation,  
had informed  his father  that he also brought  a wife who was by 
then-in  the villa.  The king  became  extremely  happy  and ordered  
the freedom  of the horse owner  in-the  prison.  He commanded  
further  that he should  not come  to his vicinity  again.
‘The horse owner left  the prison  and left the king and the 
prince  in the palace  as they  were  dressing  updo  go and welcome  
the new wife  but he went  straight  to the villa.  When  he got there,  
he told the household  members  that he was sent by the  king to 
bring  his son’s wife  to the palace  on the horse.  In as much  as they 
knew he was the imprisoned  owner  of the horse,  they did.-not 
suspect  any foul play. The prince ’s wife  was-handed  over  to him.  
He manipulated  the small wood  and the horse  went  skyward;  he 
then flew towards  the palace.  He arrived  at the palace  when  the 
king and the prince  had come  out with gorgeous  clothes  to go 
and welcome  the wife.  As he appeared  to them.  He shouted  from  
above  saying,  ‘An unserious  man died  on a rainy  day. You fools  
are going  to welcome  a new wife;  I have carried  her away.  ’
‘They were crying  and cursing  when they observed  the 
occurrence  in the sky but he disregarded  their reactions  as the 
horse flew on in the sky. When  the wife learnt  she was being  
carried  away from her husband ’s town, she started  struggling  
violently  but the man indifferently  said, ‘If you are not careful,  
you will fall down  and your  limbs  will break  into pieces. ’
‘He carried  her to a place  of about  ten day ’s journey  to the 
prince ’s home  town  and he landed  when  he got near  a town.  On 
getting  down,  he told the woman  that he was interested  in her 
as a wife and that she would  be punished  if she turned  down  
his request.  She flatly  refused.  The man fetched  some  canes  and 
started  flogging her. She groaned.
‘Coincidentally,  the king  of the nearby  town  went  to hunt  in 
the bush  and as he was coming  back  home  when  the woman  was 
crying.  He branched  to where  the cry was coming  from  and met 
the man flogging  the woman.  His action  infuriated  the king so 
much  that he ordered  his retinue  to decapitate  him on looking  at 
her beauty.  He killed  the man and took  the woman  to his palace.
‘About  a week  after  the arrival  of the woman  at the palace,  
the king said he wanted  to marry her. Having  observed  and 
thought  about  the king ’s influence  and knew  he could  kill her if 
she disagreed,  she agreed  to marry  him but the agreement  was 
not from  her heart.  She agreed  superficially  and started  thinkin g 
about  how she could  escape.
‘The king appointed  a day for their wedding.  Tie bought-  
various  items but the woman  started  behaving  like a lunatic  a 
few days to the wedding  day. She was not really  mad but'  it was 
a deceitful  act. The occurrence  saddened  the king so much  that 
he gave out money  to the herbalists  to cure the. woman  of her 
madness  - but she did not allow  them  to get near her. She was
beating  and slapping  those  who came to her. So, they left her 
alone  in a locked  up room.
‘But what did her prince-husband  that brought  her home  
before  the horse  owner  took  her?  He changed  his clothes  
to that of a traveler  and with  determination  started  moving  from  
town  to town  to seek for his wife.  He' later got near  the town  his 
wife  was and heard  the story  of how someone  used  a mysterious  
horse  to carry  a woman,  how the king wanted  to marry  her, and 
how  she became  mad  before  her appointed  wedding  day  with  the 
king*.
‘He listened  attentively  to the story and knew that it was 
about  his wife. He continued  his journey  to the-town  they said 
she was. He was there  early. On getting  there,  he enquired  well 
before  going  to the king ’s palace.  He told the king that  he could  
cure the lunacy  of his wife but the king disbelieved  him. He 
repeated  the statement  many  times  before  the king believed  his 
words.  He said he had cured  up to one-thousand insane  people  
before,  thereby  making  the case ’of his wife-look  like a simple  
one. After some time, the king allowed  him to go and try his 
ability.  He told him that she was locked  up in a room  where  she 
received  nobody  except  the person  feeding  her. The case was 
so serious  to the extent  that the king could  not even accompany  
the man to the entrance  of the room  because  she usually  beat 
him. He gave the key of the room  to the prince  and told him to 
go and open  it. He went  and when  he got to the door,  he peeped  
through  a small  hole and observed  she was his wife. He heard  
her speaking,  mentioning  his name  and asking  where  she could  
find her loved  one.
‘ As the prince  heard  this, he opened  the door. The woman  
charged  violently  towards  him to beat him up like the others  but 
the prince  mentioned  his name  to identify  himself  as her husband.

The woman  drew  back  and noticed  well before  discovering  that 
he was her true husband.  They  embraced  each  other  and narrated  
what  they had gone  through  to themselves  before  planning  how 
to escape  from  the. town.
‘The man later got out and the king was highly  surprised  
that he could  spend  such a long time in the room.  He respected  
him as a very  strong  herbalist  with  potent  herbs. He quickly  gave  
him one hundred  pounds  for himself  arid another  one hundred
pounds  for purchasing  herbs.

The prince  returned  on the second  day and stayed  for a 
long time with his wife. He later told the woman  that he would  
invite  the king inside;  that she should  greet  the king warmly  to 
portray  him as an effective  herbalist.  He called  the king in arid 
she warmly  greeted  him. The king was so very happy  that he 
gave the man another  one hundred  pounds.
‘When  they  later  agreed  on the time  they  would  go, the man 
called  the king and spoke  to him. His plans  to escape  reflected  
in his speech.  He spoke  thus: ‘Your  Highness,  I know  you have  
seen it now  that there  are different  kinds  of herbalists.  There  are 
chicken-feasting  herbalists  that don ’t know  any other  thing  than  to 
be collecting  fowls  from  house  to house.  There  are some  that are 
ignorant of  the right  type of herbs  for different  ailments because  
of their low  level of intelligence.  They are ignorant  of ancient  
herbs. Some of them do not put their minds  on the different  
herbs  for curing  different  diseases.  They  are the ones  that use the 
herbs  for guinea-worm  to treat lumbago,  the herbs  for headache  
to treat stomach  upset. But I am a herbalist  by inheritance.  It 
now remains  one thing  for you to do about  the insanity  of your  
wife. You will bring  out the horse  that,  brought  her on the day 
after  tomorrow.  You will bring  out three  hundred  pots of sulphur
into the market  square.  You will clad your wife in a gorgeous
gather  in accordance with  the directive  of the spirits.  Her insanity  will be totally  cured
on that day. Call me a bastard  if ft does  not happen.  You will also 
wear  a gorgeous  attire  on the said ’ day, being  a joyful  day. ’
That  was how  he spoke  to the king  and he accepted.  On the 
appointed-day,  they gathered  three hundred  pots of sulphur  in 
he market  square.  All the town people  gathered;  the-king  wore  a 
gorgeous  attire  and his ‘wife ’ wore  a costly  one. The prince  that 
was the real owner  of the wife wore a respectable  attire They  
put the mysterious  hors^  in the market  square  and surrounded  it 
with pots of sulphur.  After  that, the prince  looked  up and spoke  quietly  to the sky as if he was invoking  the spirits.  He did so towards  the four comers  of the town.
‘He then  lit the sulphur  in the pots  and the crowd  was covered  
with smoke  to a point  that they could  not see one another  That  
was the time he pulled  .his wife and placed  her on the horse.  
The horse  left the ground  and ascended.  He called  on the king  
saying, Goodbye,  the man in gorgeous  attire.  The 
owner  of  the wife  has carried  her away.  ’ That  was how  the prince  
brought  his wife home.  When  they got home;  the town  people  
organise  .a joint  party  for them.  They  sang  and beat drums.  The 
husband  and the wife loved  each other  like the tongue  and the
‘That was the end of the story. Hope  you have learnt  how 
strong love is. It is love that made the prince  leave his home  
town  and turn  himself  to a beggar.  It is love that made  a woman  
turn herself  to an insane  person  when  she was mentally  healthy.
I want  you to learn'  a lesson  from  this. You're  not to learn  from  
that  .Single  occurrence  but other  stories  you’ve heard from me 
and try to tell your king the whole  thing. Covetousness  is the
root of all sis; pride  is the foundation  of  downfall;  and love is 
the precious rope that ties human  beings  to one another.
‘I would Stop  here. Be prepared  to return  home  tomorrow  
home  and collect  the medicine  for the illness  of your king.  
I greet  you for sitting  down  since  morning.  Hope  your  buttocks  
are not aching  you?  You are welcome.  ’
“That was how Itanforiti  ended  his stories.  I then stood  up 
to respond  when  he finished.
‘Our  elderly  father,  Honourable  Itanforiti.  We are very  happy  
to know  you and have the opportunity  to stand  before  you. It is 
also honourable  that yop are old and wise. You did not disregard  
us as commoners.  You have sat down since morning  telling  
us many stories.  Thank,  you, thank  you very much.  May God 
continue  to increase  your progress?  May your name continue  
to spread  like the moonlight?  May you continue  to move  fi-om  
promotion  to promotion,  development  to development  and 
blessing  to blessing?  In-the  name of God that created  heaven  
and earth, the generations  of man will continue  to say of you: 
Itanforiti  is a respectable  creature. ’
“That  was how  I responded.  We then  left the room  to go and 
have our meals.
'Itanforiti  gave us gifts on the second  day. He gave Ero- 
okan  and I a bag  of gold each.  We then bid him goodbye  and he saw us off from his underground  residence.  That was how we 
left the mysterious  creature.  Honourable  Itanforiti  that made  the 
underground  his abode.
“I will not be able  to narrate  all the problems  we encountered  
before  we returned  to Alupayida.  We encountered  problems  that had never  been  gone through  by anyone  in life I will never  lose the memory  of what we. came across  on our journey  back
home;  I got to the settlement  of one-footed  goblins  where  we 
were  captured  and tied to tree. I wrestled  with a lion on the way 
and stumbled  on where  the beasts  of  the universe  were  holding  
their  conference.  They  pursued  me till I lost the natural  tempo  of 
my heartbeat.  But the worst  of all the occurrences  was that Ero-  
okan  became  unhealthy  as a result  of the various  difficulties  we 
encountered.  The  person  (the king)  that sent us on a journey  was 
no more  when  we got to Alupayida.
“Before  our return,  the whole  town  people  had unanimously  
agreed  to make  me their  new king. I was enthroned  a few days  
after my arrival.  I became  a king in a foreign  land. This is my 
seventh  year on the throne.  I sought  for permission  from my 
town  people  to come  and see you. It is now almost  three  months  
is Adeorun,  the man  seen  by you in your  youthful  days,  entered  my palace  when  I was alone  in my room.  He instructed  me to visit you and tell you my life'  history  - how I, formerly  in rags,  
became  a crowned  person.  I am grateful  for your hospitality  
since my arrival  here. May your lifetime  be prosperous?  May  
God give you comfort.  May peace  continue  to reign in your  
home.  Bye for now; the visitor  has gone  to his own house. ”
He disappeared after his last statement.  His retinue  also 
went  into oblivion.
Human  beings,  this is how the world  is. No one should  
look down on himself  A living  man should  not lose hope of 
succeeding  in life. There  are so many  tribulations  in the world  
but a determined  man  would  overcome  them  all. Everyone  is in 
need  of one thing  or the other  in this life and one should  always  
pray  to God  to answer  his aspirations.  A poor  man could  become  
wealthy.  A confident  man could  climb  the problematic  mountain  
to the top. A brave man will continue  progressing  while the 
indolent  will ever  remain  in the group  of commoners.

Ireke  Onibudo  is a frightening  inspiring  story  of 
a character  whose  early  life was beclouded  by 
a plethora  of vicissitudes  and a deluge  of 
suffering  and intimidation  from human  and  
non-human  forces.  His father's  matrimonial  
and financial  recklessness  actually  threw  him  
into a precarious  condition;  but by a dint of 
industry,  tenacity  and bravery,  he was able to 
establish  a transition  from a deep^  pit of 
deprivation  and poverty  to a rostrum  ’of royalty  
and podium  of prosperity.
In-between  his experience  of negativity  and  
positivity  were  several  intimidating  encounters  
with human,  semi-human  and non-human  
.benefactors  and malefactors  who made  him a 
victim of appointments,  disappointments,  
endorsements  -and denials.  All these  
e n c o u n t e r s  n o d o u b t s h a r p e n e d  h i s 
m e t a m o r p h o s i s  f r o m a s t a t e  o f a b j e c t  p o v e r t y  
to a condition  of fabulous wealth  and royalty  in 
a land  that  is alien  to him and his pedigree.






