

The Forest of God

1
The Beginning of Olowo-aiye
It was on a sweltering afternoon, after I had eaten the second meal of 
the day, that I left my house and strolled to the outside of the city wall. 
I climbed to the top of a huge rock; when I reached the top (of the 
rock), I sat down under a tree that grew there, hugging my legs to my 
chest. The sun was scourgingly hot indeed; human bodies were as hot 
as heated yam flour pot. Sweat soaked all the children of the world 
as if they had poured water on themselves. I, who had worn a cap 
before, who had tilted my cap pointedly towards my forehead took 
my cap off the crown of my head and peaceful air was blowing across 
my head. I also took off my clothes, except my pants which remained 
on my buttocks. The afternoon was sun-ripened indeed. The farmers 
had left their farms; they were laughing in their farm huts. The carriers 
were unable to talk; they wee panting as they were climbing the hill. 
The pathway was as hard as stone, and the roots of the trees were as 
solid as iron-dross. The ground was as red as palm oil, the cuffs of 
white trousers were dust-stained; the hems of men's flowing 
garments were red. I sympathized with the lorry crew: their bodies 
were full of dust. They were as dirty as the shrubs by the roadside. 
Those who were sitting at the back of the lorry were powdered as with 
irksome face powder; they were as rust-coloured as mud walls. Dust 
covered all the children of the world; the host of living creatures felt 
the scourging power of the sun. The lizards were running about, and 
their bodies were making rustling sounds on the dry leaves. The big 
birds had ceased to cry; for I had heard the call of the larkheeled 
cuckoo; I had listened to the voice of the dove; the red-feathered bird 
had cried; aluko had spoken, but every one of them kept deadly 
silent where God had sheltered them; only the little birds that were 
not bigger than swallows were the ones flying here and there; they 
were unstable like a leaf on the surface of the water. They were 
hopping from one tree to the other and were crying like baby chicks.
Thus was I, sitting down quietly, looking at the eye of life and 
musing about the children of men, for I have lived with various kinds 
of people. The time to which I am now referring was a crucial period
29


in my life, for it was at that time that my father shut his eyes, crossed 
to the other side of the river, and bade the world goodbye; and the 
cock crew in his absence. The matter was painful to me; it penetrated 
to the depth of my marrow. My father had no equal among men. He 
and my mother loved each other, and they laid a good example before 
us children: before me, Adeyẹmi, Ojuọlape, and Ọmọtunde. Reṣẹli 
Ọsunyọmi who was my mother, was a woman who loved her 
husband and her children very much. Tears of mercy filled my 
mother's eyes. She is still alive today; but my father is not. My father's 
death hurt me deeply, for he treated me as a father should treat his 
child; I also tried as much as I could to please him so that he would 
realize that I appreciated all he had done for me. I was thinking about 
many things within me: if my father had not died untimely, I would 
have graced his life with those things that were conjured up in my 
imagination. For if a man dresses in rags like a peasant and he is 
clothed with borrowed clothes, as long as he does not forget those who 
begat him, God will never forget him either. But as I was pondering 
these things, (little did I know that) the Creator's language was 
different from mine, and God was wiser than I. One day, in the 
morning, a message came to me from home that my father had gone 
to the vault of heaven. Thus I became down-hearted, sank deep in 
grief, and my body became feverish with anxiety; my stomach was 
upset and troubled just as when the wind moves the trees in the forest. 
Life was disgusting to me like a filthy rag, and heaven was as beautiful 
as gold in my eyes.
These were the things that I was contemplating on that hot 
afternoon that I have been speaking about, as I had been sitting on the 
rock.
Little did I know that as I was sitting down, there was somebody 
in a small bushy area close to where I was; I was not aware of this 
before. I simply sat down, staring ahead; I did not take time to spy 
into nooks and around the corners near me. If I had known this before, 
I would simply have turned my head in another direction; I would 
have sat down where nobody would have been able to find me, for I 
wanted to think deeply at that time, and I did not want anyone to 
interrupt me at all, for one should play at the time for play, fight at 
the time for fighting, weep at the time for weeping, and rejoice at the 
time for rejoicing. He who is going to a party and wears the cap of a 
farmer, is dressed in clothes like a traveller's, and wraps a cloth 
around his loins like one who is going to hunt game, that person has 
taken his sacrifice beyond the crossroads. As I was thinking very 
seriously at that moment; I did not want anyone to disturb (the flow 
of my thought) at all.
But whether I liked it or not, this man deliberately confronted me. 
I was angry at him, and I frowned like a hungry person; I was sighing 
like a man under stress. I frowned like a house-boy who broke his 
30






master's dishes and dared not tell him, but continued to hang by the 
walls, while his stomach is disturbed and troubled like the foam of 
palmwine in a jar.
When the man greeted me, I answered him very softly. Why did I 
answer him at all? So that it might not seem as if I had over-reacted, 
lest people call me a mean fellow, so that people might not think that 
I was not a gentleman. This was what impelled me to answer him at 
all. I merely greeted him; it was not from the depth of my heart.
After I had greeted him, I began to behave in such a way as to make 
him angry and go away: I kept silent; I did not speak; he spoke I did 
not laugh. I got up from where I was sitting and played along the base 
of the rock without asking for permission from him as I ought to have 
done, and when I came back again, I found him still on the same spot. 
I simply sat down again, without saying a word to him, without 
greeting him, without talking to him, and without looking at his face 
at all. I was singing and whistling; I did not even ask him to sit down. 
But what really irked me was that I saw the man sit on the rock, closely 
clinging to me as a baby would to his mother. At that point, I thought 
that that did it; trouble drove me out of the house, and now I have run 
into trouble on the rock: I had taken a bigger morsel than my mouth 
could take; I had prepared yam-flour with cold water, I had used 
beancake to eat rice; I had given gari to a white man to eat.
As I was thinking about these things, the man suddenly shouted in 
a thunderous voice. His voice sounded as if a hoodlum threw plates 
down from a high place. Fear gripped me like the wife of a man who 
went into battle: I shook like an old half-disjointed motorcycle 
climbing a hill, for the man's voice was as loud as a lion's; it shook the 
earth like that of an elephant; it filled the whole forest like that of a 
train which is close to the city and blows its horn ceaselessly. It was 
not until this time that I was able to look at him very closely. I was 
quite astounded when I found out that he was an old friend of mine. 
He was, indeed, three men rolled into one: Akara-ogun, 
he-who-cares-not-to-die-for-a-food-owner, he who fought Àgbákò in 
the forest of four thousand daemons; it was he who visited my house 
in days gone by, when the news of the visit spread throughout this 
whole nation. He looked at me and began to laugh. I looked at him 
too and laughter came out of my mouth. We both greeted each other. 
He did not look older than he used to, in my eyes. But his gun had 
become darker; it was like a cloth dyed in indigo worn by an old 
woman, which had been bought before my mother entered the house 
of her husband — a cloth which had been dyed several times — and 
had become extremely black indeed. Akara-ogun's cap also pleased 
me, because whenever he stuck matches and tobacco in the cap, and 
bent it towards his forehead, it looked like a fruit dancing on the tree. 
Whenever he passed by and tilted his cap pointedly towards his 
forehead, it took the shape of a walking stick. And at times when he
31


wanted to show off, he bent the cap towards his ear (cheek-bone); that
way it looked like a palmwine gourd tied around the trunk of a palm tree

I answered and said, 'Akara-ogun!'
He also answered; he said, 'That is me.'
I also called him the second time, I said, 'Akara-ogun!'
I called him again the third time also; I said, 'Akara-ogun!'
He too burst into laughter; he beat his chest with his hand; he said
with pride, 'Akara-ogun is my name; I bear a great name; and I chose
an appropriate oriki and I walk around seemly. I am your old, old, 
friend, and my strength is still intact, because there are bones in man's 
body. Stick your hand in your pocket; perhaps you would find some 
writing material there; some marvellous thing is about to happen
today; I have a message for you which I would like you to deliver to
the children of the world; because I have an important matter in my
head, a very pertinent piece of advice is in my head as well. Therefore,
I urge you in the name of the black race please prostrate yourself on
the rock, and let us make the rock our table. I shall stand as the
chairman, and you as the scribe; and let the shrubs represent the
 members of our association.
After he had thus spoken, I was as happy as one who had been sued 
in court,but eventually discharged and acquitted; for I have found
what I had been looking for; I have come across what I adored; God
had buttered my bread. Indeed, I stuck my hand in my pocket, as he
had told me to, and I found a lot of writing materials there. So I
prostrated myself (on the rock) and got busy with the work.
Akara-ogun also gently sat by me on the rock and started to talk 
like a parrot; he said:
Truly, I am Akara-ogun; the father who begat me was a herbalist; 
he was also an Ifa priest; our house, is filled to the brim with
medicine; strange things are in the corners of our room; potent
medicine is up in our attic," we have all kinds of living things in our
backyard. He who had epilepsy was cured by my father; the one who
had guinea-worm, his guinea-worm was cured; thousands of lepers 
were turned to sleek beauties in our home. My father lashed
small-pox; he insulted malnutrition; he defamed arthritis;
stomachache was minimized; backache was rendered 'speechless;
thread-worm kept mute; fever walked about in depression. Dysentery
was down-hearted; skin-rash shared tears; wounds sighed; craw-craw's
countenance fell; and cold longed for mercy. A lunatic lady now
ostentatiously walked around in sanity; a mentally sick man now 
shaves himself. Pregnant women delivered safely; women with babies 
joyfully went about their daily routines; wizards expressed contrition;
the witches were pleading for forgiveness. The medicine men bowed
down before my father. My dear friend, as I had told you in days gone 
by; my mother was a terrible witch. She flew in the noon day and
soared in the evening; she drank water from a human skull; 
my mother had eaten a heap of ẹ̀kọ with a meat from a child's arm;
she had eaten rice with meat from an adult's feet and had taken gari
with flesh from the cheeks of young men.

The story of how my father married my mother needs to be told
for I had never mentioned that to you before, and (I assured you), it
is a delightful story indeed. There is nothing about my father's life that
was not known to me, because he himself never relented his efforts 
when he was here on earth. As my father was roasting yam in a fire,
he was at the same time inwardly searching for a knife. When he 
was alive, he used to impress this on our minds very often:

A man who wakes up early in the morning of his life
And gives an important place in his heart to a woman's matter
Will not become importantt forever.

A woman who wakes up early in the morning of her life. 
And gives an important place in her heart to a man's matter 
Will not become important forever.

A man who is mature enough to get married
And gives an important place in his heart to his woman's 
matter
Will become important forever.

A woman who is mature enough to get married
And gives an important place in her heart to her husband's 
matter
Will become important forever.

A deceitful man who marries
A deceitful woman,
And gives an important place in his heart to deceit. 
Will never become important forever.

A deceitful woman who marries
A deceitful man,
And gives an important place in her heart to deceit. 
Will not become important forever;

An important man who marries a deceitful woman.
And does not give an important place in his heart to the 
deceitful one
Will become important forever.

Whoever is important and gives an important place in his 
heart to others who are important
Will become important forever.
33





As I am now speaking,my friend, tears almost flow from my eyes, 
because I remember my father, Olowo-aiye, a handsome man indeed! 
But I shall continue the rest of my story tomorrow. The story that I 
told you long ago, which you wrote down for the children of men was 
all about my father. So my friend, I shall rise; you get up also from the 
rock on which you have prostrated (for so long), so that you might 
avoid chest-pain; I know your house; I will visit you tomorrow. When 
I do, I shall continue with my father's story. Until tomorrow, then 
may the Lord bless our coming together then.

After he had thus spoken, he disappeared. Thereafter,I quickly got 
up from the rock and headed home.

The following morning, after I had taken ẹ̀kọ made out of fresh corn 
with moinmoin and sat down, I saw Akara-ogun, who appeared 
before me like an apparition. He still tilted his cap toward his 
forehead, as he used to do, and his cap looked like the beak of a bird.

34

As soon I saw Akara-ogun I knew that the big task was about to 
begin. I turned to my wife, and I said, Dear wife, something is about 
to happen.
She also answered and said, 'Nothing is about to happen, dear 
husband; just be prepared; God, the (heavenly) King will assist you. 
I know that you have a lot to do, but the task has to be done; I shall 
take care of your home; I shall take care of your path; I shall take 
care of our child; and I shall prepare some delicious food for you to 
enjoy.
After my wife had thus spoken, I answered her and said, 'I thank 
you for your great advice; I knew you to be an encouraging woman. 
I shall continue the task I assure you as a man; you carry on with your 
work, and I shall go ahead with mine. I am truly a man, and you are 
truly a woman. We shall demonstrate to our guest that this is a very 
delightful family indeed.
 
A strong person commands the respect of the son of man, but a 
lazy man is next-to-nothing in the sight of women. I entered and 
gathered my writing materials. I took a chair and sat by the table. I 
also placed one other chair by the table; it was on this chair that my 
friend sat: Akara-ogun-he-who-cares-not-to-die-with-the-food- 
owner. Akara-ogun began to speak, and he said:
'My friend; it was in the twenty-fifth year of my father's life, that 
he got himself ready (to go). One day, early in the morning, he headed 
towards a strange forest near our hometown to hunt; our town's 
people knew the forest as the Forest of God, for it was a very dreadful 
forest indeed. Even the hunters dreaded Igbo Olodumare more than 
the Forest of Four Thousand Daemons; and it was a law in our town 
that any hunter who had not hunted elephant must not go there to 
hunt, for it was the abode of wonders; it was there the birds talked 
like human beings, and animals bought and sold from, and to one 
another; where many trees did not have roots, but looked fresh with 
evergreen leaves. Mice were bigger than pouched rats, and snails were 
bigger than tortoises in Igbo Olodumare. The gnome and the
35

hoodlumish spirits were friends; it was there that the strong headed 
snakes terrify the hunters, for the abode of the head of the entire 
snakes in the world was there; his name was Ojola-ibinu.
'Before my father left home, he performed hunter's magic, for he 
had several magical leather-girdles around his waist, and his fingers 
were filled with the magical rings of the elders; he sacrificed six 
cows at our house. My father summoned all the medicine men in the 
town and gave them a big party with lots of food. The medicine of 
generations filled our home. For about six months, he went to and fro, 
on account of this matter of Igbo Olodumare, for whoever went there 
never came back, they always bounced from the hands of one gnome 
to the other. Ha! my father was an importunate fellow indeed; man 
surpasses man; Olowo-aiye was very much a man indeed. The day on 
which my father was all packed and ready to part with all the relatives 
was an eventful day: the medicine men gathered together in the room, 
and the elephant-hunters gathered together in the parlour;.the 
children ran up to the attic. Various kinds of people were in the 
 backyard, goats ran and beyond the forecourt of the house, some were 
crying; and men were "weeping; famous persons were speechless, and 
gentlemen frowned.'But my father was armed like an European spldier 
and armoued like ran Ifa-priest; he walked as if he were going to 
wrestle, and stood at attention like policemen before their Superior 
officer. When it came to his actual time of departure, he summoned
everybody in the house and spoke thus: 
 Today is the day that I go to the place where the powerful ones 
go to the abode of the strange beings, to the place that is very dark in 
my eyes I will leave peace behind; I shall go in to meet trouble, but 
difficulty is the father of treasure; good name is better than a new 
bride; if I endure the trials of today, I shall reap the treasure of 
tomorrow; if I joyfully return from Igbo Olodumare, my name shall 
surely endure in the world. My people all, do not have a low ambition 
for yourselves ever, strive for that which is great, he who strives for 
that which is great and does not achieve that which is great, shall 
obtain that which is close to that which is great; but he whor uns after 
that which is little, would not stand in the midst of the mighty. He 
who prays for ten dandogos if he does not receive ten dandogos, 
he would receive eight dandogos; he who prays for six trousers, if he 
does not receive six trousers; he would receive five trousers, but he 
who prays for one trouser from God, if he receives two, that fellow 
needs to be grateful to God, the (heavenly) King. I truly see that all 
of you do frown, but my mind is as strong as pebbles by the seashore.
I am not uncertain, for progress is far from him who is uncertain. I 
shall never be of divided mind as I go; by the grace of the Lord, the 
(heavenly) King who created me, I shall surely come back home. A 
pessimistic person thinks that he is going to die in the morning, and 
indeed he dies at noon; if he had been a little optimistic, he might have 

36

had about three more days to spend in the world. A person's mind is 
his priest. Let me go now; greet every body at home; take care of things 
in my absence. Here goes the man; announce to the world that a 
powerful man goes to the place where only the powerful ones go. Let 
no one; old or young, and the gentlemen, think that the pilgrim to 
Igbo Olodumare would not come back again; let all the peace-loving 
people in the world be expecting the powerful-one
Thus Olowo-aiye spoke, and he headed towards Igbo-Olodumare, 
and his eyes were changed; they were red indeed. As he was getting 
too hasty to be on his way, he almost forgot one important medicine 
that was in a little gourd, and, if he did not take that with him, it would 
have been difficult for him to find his way to Igbo Olodumare. The 
feather of a blue touraco, the feather of an aluko the feather of a 
ground hornbill, and the feather of a red parrot, were the ingredients 
with which the tiny gourd of medicine was covered, and there was 
blood around it. It belonged to my grandfather; he in turn got it from 
the guts of one python, for it was even before we were born, that many 
people had been hunters in our family. Our grandfather to whom I 
referred a while ago was the very first person, of all the people in our 
town, who went to the Forest of Four Thousand Daemons. It was at 
that time that he killed the python of which I speak, in which he found 
that tiny gourd of medicine. If one recited an incantation on this tiny 
gourd of medicine, and one mentioned the name of the place one 
wished to go, the wind would start blowing, and those feathers would 
follow the desired direction. Look, my friend, if I had not forgotten 
those incantations, I would have taught you because it was not more 
than twenty-five sentences; after teaching you the incantation, I would 
haye given you the tiny gourd of medicine too.
Igbo Olodumare was far away indeed; it was about two days 
journey to our home town. There were other jungles along the way, 
and also big rivers that were flowing and making a rushing noise as 
they were vigorously pouring on the rock. There were various kinds 
of shrubs on the way: good and bad ones. Hundreds of thorny trees 
created barriers whenever people tried to pass forough the forest; and 
the strong-headed debris converged with the troublesome liana, 
which crawled around all kinds of trees and the debris was falling on 
one as one was passing by. The animals did not let people rest; the red 
monkeys and the baboons and the long-tailed monkeys were hopping 
from one tree to the other. Their eyes were like those of humanbeings; 
so were their fingers as well. In fact, a monkey is very much like a 
human being; it seems as if the Creator made them to be relatives to 
each other. There were various things in the wilderness. There were 
big trees and tall palm trees with lots of parasites; some animals were 
living on big palm trees; the birds with pointed beaks were fond of 
the neck of palm trees, for they never wanted to miss the delicious 
kernels; squirrels never wanted to part with root aerials, and the long






thin snakes were looking for trees in hidden places; cobras were 
hiding under the grass, and the python was living by the seashore, 
and a great number of poisonous snakes loved to live in their holes; 
snails loved swampy areas, and tortoises cherished canopied tree; the
larkheeled cuckoo flew in abeyance, but the dove flew about in lofty 
places; (it) stands like a rooster in the forest and tells time to the 
hunters. The trees that have long fallen had no more power in them; 
mushrooms were growing around their stumps. The paths of animals 
differed from one another: the rat's path was narrow and clean, but 
the wart-hog's path was very wide indeed. My friend, it is better seen 
than be told; you know all kinds of difficulties in the forest, and my 
father saw all those difficulties with his eyes as he was going on his 
way to Igbo Olodumare; yet these things that I have adumbrated were 
nothing compared with what he experienced when he got to Igbo 
Olodumare.
My father spent the first night on the road, and by noon the second 
day, he was almost at his destination. My father reached the forest that 
was next to Igbo Olodumare; the name of the forest was the Jungle of 
Silence, for it was the most silent place under the heavens. There was 
only one gnome in this jungle; he was hotter than the thunder from 
the sky. The gnome never let anybody cross over to Igbo Olodumare. 
He gave the hunters a lot of trouble, although he was not taller than 
two feet. He lived under an ant-hill. He was a short devilish daemon; 
he carried a bundle of whips around everyday of his life. When my 
father reached this forest, everything was deadly silent; all the leaves 
on the trees bowed their heads down-ward, one did not touch the 
other; if was just as if there were no wind at all; all the branches of the 
trees stood straight up like an army before a supreme commander; the 
liana looked sickly where they coiled themselves; even the animals 
had deserted the place as their place of abode; the birds had headed 
towards other places of their choice. All the living things looked like 
a debtor absorbed in thought about his debt. The whole forest was 
very silent as if someone was bereaved and friends and acquaintances 
kept silent around him. You see, my friend, since my father was alone 
with this little daemon (which lived under the ant-hill) in this vicious 
forest, his crossing over must be very difficult indeed. After my father 
had wandered around this big jungle for some time, he and this little 
daemon under the ant-hill saw each other face to face. It was an 
eventful day indeed, when they finally faced each other. An accident 
met with trouble; ṣigidi (graven image) met with daemon; two lions 
met face to face. The name of this daemon is Eṣu-kekere-ode, he did 
not wear a gown nor put on trousers; he never wore cap nor pants; 
the hard-headed fellow covered his bottom with leaves. He had only 
one eye, and that eye was as around as a large rounded moon. Eṣu- 
kekere-ode had no nose at all because his eye was abnormally big; his 
mouth was as wide as the palm of a hand; his teeth were  like those of


a lion; those teeth were as red as those of a lion that had just eaten 
raw meat. Hair covered the daemon's body like clothes; his entire 
body was like that of European dog; and. there was a big moon at 
the centre of his head. As he had the load of whips upon his shoulder, 
so was a big terrifying bag hung around his neck. The bag was soaked 
in blood, and birds' feathers stuck around it, and there were various 
medicines tied by the side of the bag: tiny gourds and ato, snake's
bones and parrot's red feather, the feather of the blue touracos the 
feather,of an aluko with pieces of cowries (an ancient money) und 
various horns of animals, small and big ones, and the horns of 
antelope that was plucking okra on the form, with the father of 
partridge that was wandering around inthejungle; all these things 
converged on the bag of this little daemon (that was living under the 
ant-hill), the one whose name was Eṣu-kekere-ode.
As he was approaching his steps were jingling because of the
chain of snail shells that had been cracked into pieces, each piece as 
round as a shilling and they were tied together like beads that the 
daemon coiled around his ankles up to his very knees; so were the 
steel rings which were on all his fingers that were as black as the
fingers of a woman who works with indigo. Ha! I tell you, a terrible 
daemon was the little gnome of the ant-hill, whose name was 
Eṣu-kekere-ode.
When my father appeared on this side and he emerged on that 
side, they both halted and began to stare at each other because when 
an elephant meets an elephant, trees must fall, one upon the other. He 
was approaching my father, and my father was also going to meet 
him; and when they were about to meet each other, both of them 
stopped and started to gaze at each other again; something was indeed 
about to happen. It was Eṣu-kekere-ode that spoke first; he opened 
his big mouth and said:
Who are you? What are you? What do you amount to? What have 
you become? What are you worth? What are you looking for? What 
do you want? What are you looking at? What are you seeing? What 
are you thinking? What's matter with you? Where are you coming 
from? Where are you going? Where are you hiking? Where are you 
walking? Answer me, son of a man, answer me in one sentence! 
Certainly you are in trouble today; you have climbed the tree beyond 
its top; you have fallen from the top into the well; you have consumed 
a poison unexpectedly; you have planted your peanuts on an 
unweeded farm. You aphasic man; don't you know that a lion and an 
antelope do not see eye to eye, and that a leopard and a cow are never 
friends, and that on the day that a cat sees a rat, that is the end of the 
rat's life? You saw me, I saw you; I was advancing and you were also 
approaching; you never even took to your heels; you were walking 
with impunity before me. Were you not afraid? Were you not scared? 
Haven't you heard about me? The skulls of those who were stronger


than you are in my cooking pan; their spinal chords are in the corner 
of my room. I use the chests of dumb people as chairs in my house.
"I am the little daemon that lives in the ant-hill; my name is 
Eṣu-kekere-ode. There was an outbreak of fighting between me and 
someone in heaven, and they said I was dishonest to God, the King; 
that was why strange creatures decided that I should definitely get 
out of heaven. I left heaven and headed towards the abyss; thus I 
lived in the midst of the dead under the ground for one hundred years, 
and I learned all kinds of wisdom from them; since then that I have 
been convinced that of all the kinds of death that children of the world 
die, only a few are natural deaths from heaven. The children of the 
world are always the architect of their own fate: stupidity kills people, 
overworking kills some unexpectedly, laziness kills some 
unexpectedly, greed sends them to a sudden grave, covetousness kills 
some people untimely, sometimes a hypocrite looks for a way to kill 
another person, but unfortunately for him, instead of that person, he 
ends up killing himself — he thus finds himself in the vault of
 heaven? Sometimes a malicious friend seeks to kill his friend, but
instead of his friend, he gets himself killed. Sometimes a malicious 
friend seeks to kill his friend, but instead of his friend, he gets himself 
killed. Sometimes a rich person seeks to kill the poor one, but instead 
of that person, he finds himself in the vault of heaven; sometimes a 
not-very-important person seeks to kill a very important person, but 
instead of that person, he finds himself in the vault of heaven. A 
nonsensical person plays with death; an extravagant person plays 
with death; an aimless wanderer plays with death; a pompous person 
plays with death; a treacherous person plays with death. For what 
reason? Because the Creator is looking at his creature and what he 
does with his hands, as well as his going to and fro in the midst of his 
fellow creatures; and the Creator would not leave the creature, 
unrewarded according to his works, no matter how many changes 
might occur either here on the earth or in heaven.
"I am the daemon of the ant-hill whose name is Eṣu-kekere-ode. 
When I left the abode of the dead ones, I came to the Jungle of Silence 
and made the ant-hill my home. Here in the jungle I found animals; 
it was here that I found birds; it was here that I found spirits; but I 
drove all of them far away to the extent that I was left alone without 
any neighbour, and have been eating leaves in the forest (since then). 
But today since I have found you unexpectedly, I am thankful that my 
maker has brought something to me, for it has been a long time since 
I have eaten human flesh. After I have killed you, I will enjoy your 
flesh for about three days. I will cook okra soup with your skull; I will 
prepare spinach soup with your chest meat, and your bottom's meat 
will enrich my pepper soup. I shall keep the rest of your meat in my 
house in the anthill. Ha! I am grateful to God today; I ,am grateful to 
all the daemons today; I am grateful to all the spirits in the world; I

40






am grateful to the luck charms in my pocket, and I am grateful to, that 
very important gnome, Alade-Igbo, I am grateful to the daemon 
who is the coordinator of the ant-hills, who is also my relative.
"Thus had the gnome spoken to my father; and my father also 
replied to him as a powerful man should reply to a powerful one. He 
looked at Eṣu-kekere-ode, as a hoodlumish lady would look at her 
husband, and said to him: "He who tries to catch rain water with a 
sifter is merely deceiving himself; he who stands on the train's track 
will find himself in the vault of heaven. An adult who sees a snake 
and does not take to his heels is only hurrying himself to his grave; an 
animal that underrates a hunter shall sleep in the oven; he who 
depends upon diabolic medicine for his life would be subjected to 
poverty, the daemon that underrates me would fall headlong from 
one heaven to the other. I, the very man (of all men),have thus spoken; 
today I will tell you, daemons of Igbo Olodumare, that when the 
Creator created everything in the universe. He made man the head of 
them all. I want you to know today that pride is the beginning of 
destruction: it is the beginning of (man's) fall; it is against the law of 
man, and it is different from the plan of God the King. Thus, instead 
of you eating me up, I will give your flesh to the beasts of the forest, 
and you shall become a prey for the birds that fly on the trees. It is true 
that you have come in contact with people, and you have been making 
their place of repose your pot of soup, but Eṣu-kekere-ode, do not 
forget that one chicken surpasses another chicken, one goat surpasses 
another goat; one sheep surpasses another sheep; one bird surpasses 
another bird; man is (certainly) greater than man, a hunter is greater 
than a hunter. I tell you this, I surpass them all; I do not belong to their 
rank; I am ranked only with their father. You are simply pompous, 
you little gnome of the ant-hill, you Eṣu-kekere-ode; I am above the 
rank of your great, great grandmother; who are you? You foolish 
thing; you are in trouble today; come, let us jump on each other."
You see, my friend, my father had hardly finished his speech, when 
both of them collided, and the fight was a very fiery fight; it was a man 
against a gnome; the entire forest became extremely noisy; 
Esu-kekere-ode was very strong, and so was Olowo-aiye, my father, 
the very man of all men; he who was in the world and was wrestling 
with a pilgrim from the heaven of akeji. At the beginning of the fight, 
Eṣu-kekere-ode tried to find a place to get hold of my father's waist, 
back him up against a thorny tree, lift his legs on his shoulder, and 
throw him in the debris, and begin to punish the poor man; but this 
was very difficult (for him); as he was thinking about doing so, my 
father had other thoughts. He was looking for a way to lift the horrible 
gnome off the ground, over the crown of his head, and throw him far 
away, so that Eṣu-kekere-ode would bounce from one heaven to the 
other. However, these things were impracticable, for as he was putting 
up a fight like a lion, so was Eṣu-kekere-ode, like an elephant; and the
41






air was filled with dust; and the ground began to shake (under their 
feet) —-the vibration produced by their feet was greater than that of 
ten men. The faces of both of them were wild; they clung to each other 
as a creeping plant would to a tree in the forest; they were both 
breathing heavily like a hunter's dog. It was a big day for the little 
gnome of the ant-hill, whose name is Eṣu-kekere-ode.
After a while, this horrible gnome jumped on my father about the 
middle of his body; as my father was trying to get hold of his feet, he 
jumped on his shoulder; when he got hold of my father's neck, he gave 
him a terrible slap on the ear with all his might. My father was so 
furious that he began to push the gnome against a thorny tree. This 
caused the gnome to scream in a low voice, and he quickly jumped 
down from my father's shoulder. After this, my father got hold of his 
feet near the ankles, so strongly that he lifted Eṣu-kekere-ode above 
his pate; then he tossed him forward with anger, with the hope of 
breaking the horrible-headed thing's skull, but this was impossible! 
As my father looked in front of him, this creature was still standing 
in front of him, laughing and looking at my father as if the fight had 
just begun.
"After all of this, my father became fed up, so he stuck his hand in 
his pocket, looking for medicine. As he was searching for it, he 
found a flute that had been in our family for generations, and he 
quickly brought it out; he began to blow the flute, and the sound of 
the flute pervaded the entire vicinity. It sang about how God was the 
originator of human victory, and that He owns everything in the 
world and in heaven: the human possessions and the treasure 
(concealed) under the ground, the one on the surface of the waters, 
and the one in the air. He also sang about how God the King could 
not be impeded — the Creator does whatever He wants to do—and 
that nobody can hinder God the King from promoting whoever he 
wants to promote (in life), and that no villain can hinder God the King 
from uplifting people. My father's flute sang that a villain gets up in 
the morning, looking as green as fresh plantain planted by the river 
side, and by noon, he becomes as dry as firewood, and in the evening, 
he was completely burnt. A deceitful person tells his friend that he 
has clothed himself with cloth, but when a truthful person sees him, 
he points out that he is in fact plainly naked. Thus went the song that 
my father mournfully played on the day that he and the little gnome 
of the ant-hill met face-to-face.
The song was echoed throughout the forest, and the flute sounded 
better than a king's flute. Since the song was a mournful song, the 
gnome could not help its penetration into the nook and crannies of his 
brain; a truthful person suppresses a deceitful one; Eṣu-kekere-ode's 
head hung down like the leaves of a banana tree; the gnome of the 
ant-hill stared downward in contemplation; the little creature opened 
his mouth and said:
42






"The children of men have changed — wise ones are now beihg 
found among them; it has been a long time since I have made this place 
my place of abode, and nobody has ever tried to change my mind 
before, but since God created me, I have noted that a patient person 
has never, and will never be disappointed, except the one who 
weakens his patience with stupidity; as from today I will never 
ill-treat men anymore; I will never lay my frustration on men, 
neither will I frown on the animals, and I vow not to ill-treat the shrubs 
in the forest anymore, for your words have changed my heart; I shall 
not behave as though I was 'country-bred' anymore. But don't you 
ever think that I said all that I have said out of sheer weakness, for if 
you have that thought, then you have not understood me at all; then 
you would be like a person who takes a sheep for a cow, a car for a 
bicycle, and mistakes the world for heaven. A cool-headed person sees 
fight and stays away, and'a fool thinks he is weak, but when the 
patient person starts fighting, everybody begins to fall like the trees 
(in the forest). I am grateful to you for the melancholic song that you 
sang, the song that reminded me of the One who created; if it were 
not because of the song that you sang, I would have fought you three 
days, for I have fought like that before; I might have fought six 
months; I have fought for as long as three months; I have also fought 
a fight which lasted for a whole year before even I, the little gnome of 
the ant-hill, the one whose name is Eṣu-kekere-ode."
Thus did the gnome speak, and my father was not angry anymore; 
they shook hands with each other, and everyone went on his way . But 
as it is with our culture fighting never goes without the fighter being 
hurt, whether the one involved in the fight was at fault or not. My 
father bumped against a tree and tore his hunter's bag; he lost his 
important medicine, and his flute got broken. Also, Eṣu-kekere-ode
was wounded, lost two of his teeth, and one ring; one of his legs was 
broken, and he was limping around like a guinea-worm victim. This 
is why the wise people liken fighting to poison, and they run away 
from it everyday. Fighting does not behove a person: it is just like a 
fish bone (in a human) throat. But a foolish person uses a lamp to 
search around for fighting.
Olowo-aiye went on his way and continued his journey, he and 
God the King with him. When he was about to pass through the 
wilderness of silence, he came to a little river which was both flowing 
and shining, which was very cool indeed; my father stopped there and 
took a bath after which he ate a red banana and drank the water 
from the water-bottle in his pocket; and he was relieved, like a person 
who owed two pounds but was lucky enough that an opportunity to 
earn ten pounds entered his house.
It was not more than ten minutes after my father left the river and 
had departed from the Jungle of Silence when he came to a field that 
was wide and beautiful. The grass was very cool and appealing,
43

like the front yard of a white man's house. Little trees were greater in 
number than big trees, and each tree that was in the midst of the 
surrounding was very beautiful indeed. They all stood tall and 
straight. The stems of some of them were white, and some were black; 
the body of some of them were like a rainbow in the sky, which had 
both dark and bright colours. There was a big path that went straight 
forward, which meant that the path that my father was following 
became bigger. Big stones were lined up on both the left and the right 
sides of the path. Besides these stones, someone had planted little trees 
all along the road, all which bloomed and were very pretty. My 
friend, the death that kills one's contemporary speaks to-one-in 
proverbial language. Vhen Olowo-aiye saw these things, he too knew 
that he was getting close to Igbp Olodumare. My father got ready, and 
adjusted his pants.
"The wise and the stupid look alike at the time of enjoyment, but 
the wise comes out plainly at the top at a time of tribulation. My father 
behaved like a wise man at this time; he gently put down the things 
that were in his hands; he went under one of the trees there; he 
grovelled flatly on the ground before God, and said:
"Thou God the King who created me. Thou the Omnipotent God, 
who made Igbo Olodumare, Thou who art wonderful, who made all 
the wonderful things. Thou who created all the hunters in the world, 
the time has now come that I want you to stand behind me. Some 
people came into the world, but when they left the world, their names 
went with them; those people walked through this world just like a 
snake that crawled on a rock, for we never saw their footprints 
anymore. But some others came into this world, and when they left 
the world, their bad names stayed behind them; those people were 
like a black stain on a white cloth, and when the washerman washed 
the white cloth to the extent that it was almost torn, instead of getting 
rid of the black stain, it was just (showing all the more): it became more 
conspicuous on the white cloth as the white kept getting whiter. I 
adjure thee, my Creator, do not make me like those. I am humbly 
pleading today that it might please thee (to make me) like those who 
came to the world and were like the moon; they were benefiting from 
posterity; their names remained behind them. As I am going today, 
let it please thee that I might come back like a man, to the end that 
when my days are spent and I am dead, people might not ask themselves, 
'Was the man ever born?"'
'Olowo-aiye said no more than this, and the Omnipotent God 
heard him from heaven; for there is no man like an angel; neither is 
there any on whom one should rely like God the King.
'My father got ready and kept going, whistling and walking like a 
warrior.
'It was not too long after this, when he looked and saw in front of 
him, two ladies who were following the same trail (coming towards
44






him), clapping their hands rhythmically, just as it is customary with 
most women. It seemed as if these two women had made the place 
their home; they were enjoying themselves, in the forest and were 
being modish as if they were in the heart of the city. One of them was 
light in complexion, stout and tall as she seemed as if she were 
married; but the second one was neither very fat nor tall; she had a 
dark complexion, and her teeth were as white as a new ear of corn? 
They were both specimens of beauty. Their speech was like that of 
noble people, and their steppings like those of people whose lives 
have been shattered by wordliness.
"When they met my father, he greeted them, and they also 
responded to him too, just as a mere acquaintance would respond. 
After this, my father faced his own way, and they followed their own 
paths as well. But one could not help wondering how two famous 
persons got into this jungle. This was why my father turned back to 
look at them; this was the time that the younger one looked back too, 
and when both of them looked at each other, they smiled at each other, 
and each faced his own way and went on. The second time my father 
looked back, this woman's eyes again caught my father's; my father 
was not yet married; he was a bachelor; still he managed to continue 
on his way. But the third time my father looked back again, and this 
woman also looked at him again, and my father smiled and she smiled 
as well, and the teeth of the beauty were as white as a white-washed 
wall, Olowo-aiye turned back; the man turned his pate back from Igbo 
Olodumare — my father went towards the woman — may God 
deliver the child of the world from the hands of the troublesome 
who jauntily tilt their head-ties toward the forehead.
"When my father was walking toward this woman the woman 
stopped, but the other woman walked a little bit ahead, and she also 
stopped, standing aloof from the other one, for when a man and a 
woman want to talk privately, the third person is always a hindrance 
to them. Look out, my friend; be very careful in your life when you 
go with your neighbour to his fiancee; think before you get into their 
discussion, for if you do not, it would seem like a stain on a white 
cloth, and if they smile at you on their faces, that does not mean that 
they are not saying right from the corner of their hearts: 'This fool 
doesn't let us enjoy our flirting at all.'
"When my father got to the woman, he greeted her: 'Is your home 
at peace? Is your body in sound health? I hope there's no problem.' 
She also answered him very appropriately.
After her response, this woman spoke with a smile, on her face; 'It 
seems as if I know you from somewhere.'
My father also replied and said, 'It looks that way to me, too. Is the 
house at the back of our house your house?'
'Yes, it is true, there is a blacksmith's house at the back of our house, 
and there was a girl, a witch who had lived there before Olowo-aiye
45






started going about the hunter's forest, and it has been long since my 
father had seen her. So the girl had left the house, she and her older 
sister, and they had made Igbo Olodumare their place of abode! It was 
when my father asked those questions that the matter became clear to 
her. The girl responded and said,
"Truly, I am the girl whose name is Àjẹ́dìran who lived in the 
blacksmith's house. It was a fight that ensued one day which made 
the people in our house tell lies against us, saying that we were the 
ones who killed and ate their children; besides, at the time that I am 
speaking about, my older sister and I did not know witchcraft. The 
people in this world simply decided to give us a name hat did not fit 
us. Before he end of three months, everybody throughout our town 
believed hat my older sister and I were witches. How stupid can 
people be? If two or three people say something, the rest seem not to 
think for themselves anymore, and they too start saying what they
had not seen wih their own eyes. That was how men gave my older 
sister and me a name that did not befit us. After all was said and done, 
we were exasperated enough, so that we went to learn witchcraft, 
thus, in our exasperation, we turned ourselves into witches from then 
until this very day. This is the way some live their lives in this world, 
they are like stumbling blocks, and they(the people) would accuse 
him of behaving falsely until that person would decide, saying, since 
people have said that he did that which he did not do, it is better for 
him to really do it; this is one of he beginnings of the (down) fall of 
the children that God has created to live on this earth.
"You man of Valour, after my older sister and I became witches, 
we daunted he people because we killed and ate both old and young, 
and we killed important people in he society. At least, this matter 
angered God the King, for even if the children-of-he-world had 
behaved foolishly before, so have we behaved in a more stupid and 
more monkey-like manner (today). In the morning, one day an old 
witch came to block our way in our (own) house, and this particular 
witch was tougher than we were; this vicious creature came to pick a 
fight wih us, she drove us away from (home) right to the (very) Igbo 
Olodumare. I will never forget this matter for my entire life, for if it 
were not because of this (event) I would have found the man who 
would marry me. For this reason I strongly appeal to you, you 
handsome man; do not think of me as a contemptuous person for 
asking the question that I am about to ask now. I want you to know 
that a bad custom of the children of men does not allow a woman to 
choose the husband whom her soul desires; it is the men who have 
the right to ask women to marry hem. If a woman likes a man and 
wants to marry him, it is always difficult for her to tell him. This 
custom of the children of men punishes a part of the children of men, 
and if a man sees a snake and a woman kills that snake, as long as the 
snake does not escape, it is not against (any natural) law. I want it
46






to be crystal dear to you that if a woman likes a man and she shows 
her love to the man, this does not violate the (natural) law. Countless 
people say that a woman who makes the first move to court a man is 
a wayward woman, and before a woman could do such a thing, the 
fire (of love) at the bottom of her heart must have been stronger than 
a fiery furnace. In short, you powerful man, you are not among the 
unenlightened ones. I like you very much; I want you to be the father 
of my home; I want to be your wife, so we would both be companions together.'

"Look at me, my friend! The amazing thing in this story is that this 
sweet speech from this woman's mouth made my father taste love for 
the first time in his life. Love glutted and spilled over his face like palm 
wine overflowing from the gourd; Olowo-aiye forgot about character 
because of beauty; because of a shiny face, he forgot all about wisdom; 
because of a set of white teeth, he made himself the husband of a witch; 
since that day, my father had dragged trouble behind him and 
mistaken trouble for a woman.
"It was about three months after this, before they got married; but 
since they decided to get married, and my father had hung his hunting 
bag on his shoulder and put his machete back into its scabbard and 
turned his face towards the road to Igbo Olodumare, the woman had 
followed him, she and her older sister with whom she had been 
walking about. In the end, it was the king of Igbo Olodumare that 
married them. You will hear about that story later. When these two 
women first followed my father, they thought he would turn back in 
a short time; they did not know that he really meant to hunt in Igbo 
Olodumare. But after they had walked for a while, the woman asked.
'Where are We really going?"
My father answered and said, 'To Igbo Olodumare.'
Again, the woman asked, 'What are you going to do there?' 
My father replied, and said, 'I am going to hunt.'
This woman answered again and said, 'What do you rely upon?'
My father also answered and said, 'I rely on a gun, I rely on a 
machete, I rely on medicine; and I rely on the heavenly King.'
After this the woman answered again and said, 'Have you ever 
been to Igbo Olodumare?'
My father answered too and said, 'I have never been to Igbo 
Olodumare, but I have heard about it.'
This was the point that they had reached when the older sister of 
the woman answered and said:
'You young man, Igbo Olodumare is very dangerous; it is the home 
of accident; it is the Forest of Sorrow; if you are not careful, you will 
regret your going there; but if you will take advice, you will have a 
good name in the future; no children of men go there and come back 
(again). But since the Creator has made it possible for you to run 
into us, you will go back (home again) if you will listen to us.


"Before you get into the forest itself. I'm afraid of the gatekeeper, 
for he is a very bad gnome; his name is Anjọnnu-ibẹru. He always 
carries a big book in his hands (the book) in which all the sins of the 
children of the world are written; he has arranged those sins systematically: 
the sins of murder, falsehood, snobbery, slander, shamelessness, 
selfishness, pride, covetousness, and all kinds of other awful 
sins. Beyond these, other sins which seem small are the big ones in 
the sight of Anjọnnu-ibẹru, who is the gate-keeper of Igbo Olodumare. 
(For example), sins like a child eating three (wraps) of ekọ when he 
was actually told to eat only two (wraps); like a little child sent on an 
errand playing on his way (instead of running the errand he was sent); 
like a child going to fetch water and smashing the gourd on the 
ground; like a child wearing some clothing which was new yesterday 
and getting it spoiled today; "like asking a small question from him 
only to have him respond by telling lies, and while one tries to catch 
him in one lie, he is telling the third one, to the extent that it seems 
that the child is carrying a suitcase filled with lies — all these things 
are found in Anjọnnu-ibẹru (who is the gate-keeper of Igbo Olodumare)'s book.
"Before anybody enters the forest, this gnome will ask him to swear 
that he had never committed those sins, or that he had never denied 
them before; if the person is unable to swear, he (Anjọnnu-ibẹru) will 
pull out his club and hit the person on the head and beat him at the 
back of the neck with a stick and break the person's waist, and that 
person will become one who limps around. And if the person swears 
falsely and enters this forest, a sixteen-eyed lion which is in Igbo 
Olodumare would devour him. Therefore, you Olowo-aiye, be 
prepared and tighten your belt very well."
As the woman finished this speech, when my father was about to 
respond to her, his new fiancee answered; she smiled slightly; she 
looked at her older sister straight in the eyes and said, 'You, my dear, 
older sister, you who have been taking care of me from my childhood, 
do not leave me alone; for the peace of an older (sister) is that of the 
younger (sister) as well; the sorrow of the older (sister) is that of the 
younger (sister) as well; for if relatives stand up against relatives and 
relations poke each other's eyes with a stick, still one's house-mate 
would always be one's house-mate. Help my beloved in this matter 
because he cannot deal with it alone; neither can I by myself. A child's 
wisdom cannot stand before an adult's wisdom. As we now go to Igbo 
Olodumare, I would not be all that frightened if you would play your 
role as an older sister, and if the Creator is happy with my betrothed 
husband, he will certainly return home.
'Thus Ajẹdiran spoke and flattered her older sister. According to 
the elderly people's proverb, 'He who knows how to wash his hands 
shall dine with the elders.' Her older sister was happy, and she ’said, 
'I am very grateful that my own mother gave birth to you. Some
48






people got to their husband's home and forgot all about their families; 
these are the parasites without root; they cannot stand alone without 
leaning against the tree; and any day that the tree falls will also see 
the end of the parasite's life. (So it is with those people), the day that 
(they) begin to experience some problems in their husband's homes, 
it would be very difficult for them to talk to their own families. It is 
then that they would hiss and begin to cry, shedding tears of 
foolishness from their eyes, and the sinus of stupidity would begin to 
trouble their nostrils, and they would begin to experience difficulty 
before they could eat. It is an abomination to God that a mighty tree 
should forget its roots, that a lady should get to her husband's home 
and forget her heritage.
"But you Ajẹdiran you are not in the category of the foolish; your 
older sister is important to you, and any younger one who up-lifts the
older one would certainly be lifted up in the future because those 
who are younger are not blind: they have their eyes to see plainly. 
There are different kinds Of people in the world: there are pompous 
people in the world; he who does not have the money to build a 
one-storey building, but gets-started to build a two-storey house, has
put (upon his pate) a hat of ignorance. Ajẹdiran observed the attitude 
with which God had endowed her. Your attitude shall elevate you,
thank you. I too would not behave insultingly, for I would look like 
an older (sister) who behaves like a younger (sister} who has lost her
place and goes after conspiracy — I shall do all I can for you, I shall 
do all I can for your husbahd and I shall be very prepared; it is time;
let us go.
After this woman had finished speaking, she stuck her hand in the 
pocket of her short pant and brought out one fruit; after she had 
examined it for a while, she threw it into her mouth. This was the last
thing that my father saw: he never saw the woman anymore (she 
disappeared). But after a short while, when a fly alighted on my
father's little sore on the leg that was cut by a tree when he was fighting 
Eṣu-kekere-ode, and he tried to swat that fly off, it did not move; 
instead it changed into a snake and started curling around his leg, and
my father had to start running away. When this snake changed again, 
it became a rat; the rat changed again, and became a tortoise; the 
tortoise changed and became an elephant; and when the elephant 
changed, it became the woman who was the older sister of my father's 
wife.
She faced my father and gave him some fruit which was in her hand 
and she said, "Take this, I have just tried it before your eyes, and it 
worked; whenever you are faced with tragedy, put it in your mouth, 
and name whatever you want to change into, and you will change into 
that thing immediately.'
"Olowo-aiye thanked this lady. Ajẹdiran also thanked her on 
behalf of her new lover; after this, they were all on their way.






"Within a short time, they arrived at Igbo Olodumare, but it was 
getting dark, and no one enters into the vicious forest in the mid-night 
except he who would not mind to be thunderously stricken (by the 
vicious spirits in the forest), for various strange creatures play around 
in the middle of the night, both the small and the big ones: the one
that has eyes, and the one that has none; the one with two hands, and 
the one with three heads; the one that looks like a small brown
 monkey, and the one with horns like a beast — various things like
those fill the forest to the brim, and during the mid-night, all of them 
play around. Because of this, my father and those women had to sleep 
near a rock until the following morning. Ajẹdiran told my father that 
she remembered one particular charm, which was in a pocket of her 
undergarment; it was a type of oil, and she took the oil and rubbed 
it on her new husband's body and told him that before five next 
morning, he would be a lot stronger.
"Indeed, the following morning, my father's bones were stronger 
than those of a gorilla; his eyes turned red, (and) my father became a 
red-eyed (man); when he was flirting with his new wife and he lightly 
hit her, she was almost wounded. When it was time for them to eat, 
my father's morsel was bigger than an orange, and he was eating like 
a grazing cow. As soon as he finished eating, he got up and hung his 
hunting-bag on his arm and his machete scabbard on his shoulder 
with his gun, which (scabbard) was black and stained with blood. 
Olowo-aiye headed to the path toward Igbo Olodumare. His eyes 
were as wild as the eyes of a hungry man.
"When they appeared in Igbo Olodumare and could see the town's 
gate-keeper straight ahead, these two women metamorphosed, and 
became birds, for this was not difficult for them to do: they were 
witches. The older sister flew off and alighted on the top of a very big 
tree that was at the gate; (and) the younger sister who was the bride 
alighted on a little tree by the roadside; she was following my father 
as he proceeded along the path.
"So my father was left by himself as a human being while his other 
playmates were as birds; still my father did not worry very much 
about death and disease; he never was afraid of an unexpected 
sorrow; he was not daunted by affliction in the forest that was terribly 
dark. Olowo-aiye kept going, he, and God the (heavenly) King.
"You, my friend, there is a lot (more) to say; I will not tell you the 
rest of those adversities now. I think I will leave the rest until 
tomorrow; it does not behove a man to do more than God has given 
him the strength to do. Today's work is enough; expect me very early 
tomorrow morning. Good bye. Greet your wife for me."
50






The Fight at the Gate of the Forest of God
Thus the man spoke, and he left that day. As it began to dawn the 
second day I saw him again. We did not start work on time on this 
second day, because my brothers, my relations from my mother's side; 
brought one small matter to me, and I asked to be excused to attend 
to them. After this my friend and I went to the table, and we dined. 
After we had rested a little while after food we started on our work. 
He continued with the story, and he said:
"You my friend, you remember yesterday when we were in the 
story; where my father had set eyes on Igbo Olodumare and went
forth, he and his bethrothed wife whom he met in the forest, and had 
been utilizing the little opportunity they had, enjoying their lives in 
the midst of the trees and the palm trees. I also said that my father's
in-law, the lady who was my mother's older sister, was also with
them. 
'When my father appeared before Anjọnnu-ibẹru, who was the 
gatekeeper of Igbo Olodumare, eẹen he knew that he was before a 
very important gnome.This fairy wore a very short garment which
was like a hunter's, with a pair of short knickers which did not reach
further than his knees — all of these were soaked in blood — they 
were bloody-red indeed. He had made a belt out of a rope from one 
big tree and tied it around his waist. Moreover, his hair was bushy, 
like that of a lunatic, and was filled with all kinds of rubbish. In the 
middle of his head was a little hole from which smoke was coming 
out.He had drawn all kinds of things all over his body, with red and 
white powder; the face and the nose of the gnome were like the walls 
of a shrine: a very dreadful (sight) indeed. Cudgel and club, a load of 
whips and numerous stones; human bones, and animals' skulls, birds' 
beaks, and countless snail-shells were the things with which 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru surrounded himself. He who was the gate-keeper of 
Igbo Olodumare, was a vicious fairy (indeed).
'When my father came out from the south (of the gnome's location),


the fairy held his book in his hands; he was reading it; when he saw 
my father, he put the book aside; he examined his cudgel, and touched 
the loads of whips; after he had examined these weapons, he smiled 
and rested his hands on his hip; he advanced forward a little, and 
looked at Olowo-aiye as he was approaching, like a carefree person, 
walking like a warrior.
“Just before my father got to him, he bellowed in a thunderous 
voice, and said to the fairy, 'Are you the Anjọnnu-ibẹru who is the 
gate-keeper of Igbo Olodumare?'
The other answered and said, I am, I am the one, I,the famed man
am the one. 
After this, my father said, 'If you are the gate-keeper, open the door 
for me; I want to go and hunt; hurry up, I am in haste.' 
"But Anjọnnu-ibẹru burst into laughter and said, 'You really don't 
know what you are in for; do you mean you want to enter or what?'

Nobody enters here without swearing in my book, for I am the 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru, who is the gate-keeper of Igbo Olodumare, I am not
just a mythical being of the present age; it has been a long time that I
have been here, my age is just a little less than ten thousand years.
Come over here and swear before me, if you commit perjury, a lion 
will devour you, and if you do not swear, you will be severely 
punished -club on the back of a maniac- and when I hit you on 
the back of your neck with a stick, you will know what you are in for.

My father was angry, Olowo-aiye bellowed like an elephant and 
said, "When a big affliction dashes one to the ground, smaller ones
grab the opportunity to climb on that one; if it were not for the
afflication which one experiences in the forest while one hunts, you
(of all things) would certainly not dare to underrate me! You 
white-eyed fairy, bring your book, if it pleases me, I'll swear, if it does
not,I shall not swear. If you whip me, I shall whip you as well; if you
slap my face, I shall slap yours; if you slap my ears, I shall slap yours;
if you throw a rock at me, I shall throw a dross at you. I (am) 
Olowo-aiye the man who surpasses other men, the hunter who is the 
head of (all other) hunters.

This gate-keeper did not even have any regard for my father: 
instead of answering my father so that they would be engaged in 
continuous dialogue, he gently picked up the book, opened to a place
and placed it in front of my father. There were many kinds of sins of 
the children of the world (listed in the book), both serious and minor
sins. He asked my father to swear if he had not committed any of those
sins.

Look at me, my friend lift up your eyes, for words are reflected 
through facial expressions. God is a great King, so be careful, be 
careful, be careful before you disparage your fellowman, because my
father was the one who used to tell all of the children of the world not
to sin anymore, and it was surprising for him to find out on that day,


when he himself saw that the behaviours that he had rebuked in others 
were his own habits too; the sins that he had preached to the children
of world not to commit, were the (very) sins he was now 
committing too: the kind of walk he forbade the people to walk was
the kind of walk he was walking; the words he had told the children 
of the world not to speak, were the (very) words he was speaking. 
Shame came face to face with shame, when my father saw those sins 
in the gate-keeper's book, where he listed them very boldly!

'Ha! Good-for-nothing people fill this world to the brim; some 
people scare me; they always shout about other people's children 
around; they shout at home, they shout in the country; they shoubin 
the nooks; they shout in a plain and open space; they shout in the 
living room; they shout in the bedroom. They look like handsome men 
in appearance but are filled with thread and tape worms and have 
filthy livers and dirty intestines inside. These do not have roots at all, 
yet they shout that other people's roots are not big enough: a parasite 
scoffs at a liana, an ordinary stump ridicules awùsá a feather tells a 
rock that it is not heavy, yet feather is on the surface of the water 
whereas the rock is the bottom of the river. The children of the world 
watch other people's occiput, but they will never try to look at theirs. 
My friends, beware; do not sit in the assemblage of the talebearers,for 
they are lunatics; their mouths; are as sharp as two-edged swords and 
as strong as an axe which my father used, to fell trees in the forest. 
They always kill people with their mouths they push others into their 
graves for what? Because Satan has taken a troublesome chair and 
has taken his seat with joy and has reclined within these people, and 
when Satan felt comfortable, he went and brought a mattress in there, 
and he is sleeping and snoring there. Always think about the end, for 
God is coming to visit them; only it is not time yet; it shall all happen 
before our eyes. The end of a slanderer is never good and his fall is 
always as great as the fall of a twelve-storey building which falls all 
at once. For it is like a cloud that is as bright as silver afar off, but when 
one gets near it, it becomes nothing. 
 "You,my friend, when Olowo-aiye looked into the gate-keeper's 
book, it became very difficult for him to swear. The matter never
parted from my father's mouth; he talked about it until we were born. 
Since then, he had commanded that no one should slander his 
fellowman behind his back anymore, for none in this world is perfect.
"But my father did not confess before the gate-keeper; for the 
children of men do not confess the truth in the presence of the 
enemy; after the children of the world have put on the garment of 
corruption, they defend themselves by putting up tough faces to cover 
up their shame; gentle speech departs from man;everything then 
becomes aired with chaos (and fighting). My father put the book 
down and hissed and told Anjọnnu-ibẹru that he had never sworn 
before anyone -chaos ensued, club on the back of a lunatic— a
 53.


fairy and a human being engaged in fighting: a (big) event was taking 
place in Igbo Olodumare. Dust invaded the air; my father and fairy 
gate-keeper began to wrestle; my friend, something happened.
"All the fairies gathered together, the animals assembled, the birds 
gathered together, and the snakes coiled around the trees; for since 
this big fight started, the bell had been rung all around Igbo 
Olodumare and all kinds of strange creatures began to gather 
themselves together. They came to watch. Only the older fairies could 
not come to watch because of domestic encumbrances in their homes. 
Still those sent representatives who would go to give them the news 
(of the fight). All living things with hearts, (with breath) who were not 
used to getting out in the day came out to watch; for a pouched rat 
came out, and we saw an owl; the bat also came with the birds. All the 
important animals that were living dose to the gate came out because 
of this matter; for the lion stood as the chairman, and the elephant 
stood as the vice chairman and the leopard was among those 
watching. But the fish could not come, because the ocean was far away 
from the place of the fight, and if a fish gets out of water, that fish is 
ready for the heaven of akeji'
'The fight was a very big fight indeed, for my father never ceased 
talking about it until his death. As the story went, Anjọnnu-ibẹru 
almost broke my father's back as he continued to dash his back against 
the tree. But he was not slow (to act) either, for he threw the fairy into  
the midst of liana trees too, and the thorns poked his feet and cut his 
body all around. This fight lasted a long time before it was ended, 
because there was no-one to separate these fighters; besides, those 
who were standing by did not want the fight to end on time, because 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru was an obstinate person himself, and he had lost the 
respect of all his peers. He always victimized them, and whenever 
there was a fight between him and his wife, he never listened to any 
one who tried to stop the quarrel; (for that) he has been given a name: ” 
an obstinate person wears an ignominious garment; he who fights and 
gets people like us to stop it, must realize that we do it just because 
we love him (and nothing else). Anjọnnu-ibẹru was severely beaten 
that day: the fairy began to pant seriously. The story is not too 
interesting when I tell it; if you heard it directly from my father's 
mouth you would have been greatly amazed, for (while they were 
fitting), they uprooted the roots of the trees and broke stems of trees 
with their feet, they uprooted the shrubs, and their feet sounded on 
the ground like a drum. They were all wet as if they were beaten by 
the rain. But after a long time of continuous fighting, they separated, 
sat down, and rested.
"As they were resting, the gate-keeper's wife brought food for her 
husband and brought water along with it also. When Olowo-aiye's 
wife, who had remained a bird heretofore, saw this, she changed and 
became a human being, got food from her pocket and gave it to her 
54

new husband, and said, Take this, eat very well, try to avoid stomach 
ache: one husband does not surpass the other.
"Thus the two of them took care of their husbands, because taking 
care of her husband is an important job of the woman who has a 
husband. It is only when both husband and wife are happy that they 
can enjoy their children. Patience is both the father and the mother 
of advantage; it is only a foolish person that complains that he had too 
much patience, for there is no end to patience. Let husbands and wives 
know that if the patience they have for each other today is more than 
that of yesterday, they will be wealthy and will be blessed with 
children as well, and they will have peace, which tops the list, 
compared with both money and children. Let people continue to cheat 
you — be patient — as you know within yourself that that is just the 
inception of their down-fall. If a person cheats you, and you pretend 
that you do not know you have put that person into a hot pot (with 
him in it). But if yon are not patient enough, and you begin to be angry 
with the damned-headed person, he will drag you into his stupidity; 
then he will know that he had angered you, and he will then put on 
the garment of pride on his shoulders. Since he does not hope to 
progress in life, and when he hits you with sorrow, he will thus hinder 
you from progress in the future.
"When my father and the fairy had rested and had filled 
themselves with their wives' food they continued their fight. (As the 
fight progressed), smoke started coming out of the crown of the 
gnome's head and this scared the people very much. But before they 
started fighting the second time, all the beings in Igbo Olodumare 
had gathered together very closely. God is a mighty King; my father 
experienced all kinds of troubles; Olowo-aiye is very much of a man 
indeed. The fight continued to be intensive, because the matter was 
beginning to take a shameful shape since both their wives were 
standing by, watching their husbands. You, my scribe, don't you think 
that one needs to put more effort into such a fight? He who wants to 
throw a person on the ground in the presence of the person's wife 
don't you see that that person is determined to bring shame on the 
person? When the fighting is finished, the shame will still remain; then 
one would not dare to get into any argument with one's wife, or else 
the wife would rush upon the husband (to hush him). And when it 
comes to the point that the wife darts upon a husband (to beat him 
up), and when it comes to the point that the wife slaps the husband and 
kicks the husband and the husband begins to run into the room and the 
backyard, and the woman begins to twist the husband's shirt around his 
neck, and the wife begins to change the husband's orders; and when the 
wife goes out without telling the husband and when we ask where the 
wife is coming from, and she replies by shunning one through facial 
expressions, don't you see that something is indeed wrong there?
"And if a wife looks at the husband contemptuously, all those
55

things would always happen between husband and wife. Because of 
this, on the day that Olowo-aiye fought the gate-keeper, chaos and 
unrest filled the air in the forest. What really vitiated everything were 
the big drums and tom-tom which the gnomes of Igbo Olodumare 
brought to the place of the fight before the second round of the fight 
started. The gnomes were beating the drums, and the gorillas and the 
monkeys were beating the bongos, and when they asked for my 
father's name, and he told them, they began to intensify their praise 
drumming, saying:
”Olowo-aiye, Olowo-aiye, collide with him, attack him, collide 
with him, attack him, the son of Akọwediran, the son of Akọwediran, Olowo-aiye, Olowo-aiye can't you perform like your father? 
Olowo-aiye, Olowo-aiye are you healthy? Are you healthy? Is there 
any trouble? Is there any trouble? Olowo-aiye, Olowo-aiye there is a 
big cudgel on your right hand side and a load of whips on your left; 
the fall of the gnome is on the peak of the rock. Olowo-aiye, hold 
the arm of the fairy, hold the feet of the gnome; lift the fairy off the 
ground completely. Olowo-aiye, Olowo-aiye the eyes of the gnomes 
are on you; the eyes of humans are watching you; all the living beings 
are gathered, filling Igbo Olodumare complete, etc., etc.
Thus the (talking) drum sounded intensively and both of them 
were panting as the ground was shaking terribly, and all the forest 
came to a complete silence. After a while, Anjọnnu-ibẹru lifted up my 
father's right foot off the ground completely, and he put it on his 
shoulder. My father also supported himself with his left leg as the
gnome tried to push him into the pit so he would fall into it — he 
would have filled the pit to the brim — but that was impossible, for 
before he pushed my father into the pit, my father had extricated his 
right leg out of his grip, and had stood firmly on the ground; and when 
he took a look at the gnome's eyes he burst into laughter and said, 'A 
cat's back never touches the ground: it's a taboo, and all the gnomes 
shouted. It was after this that my father stooped down and carried the 
gate-keeper on his shoulder and was moving (toward a rock) hoping 
to dash his back against a huge rock which was close by, but before 
he got to the rock, that fellow had made a monkey-like tumble from 
his shoulder and had stood on the ground very firmly, and the gnomes 
beat their drums for joy, rejoicing with the gate-keeper for being so 
lucky.
After a while, this gnome was angry, so he was determined to 
show hirnself as a gnome; he changed and became a lion. Since my 
father was not only a young hunter he behaved like an adult hunter: 
he took the fruit which his wife's older sister gave him (and) put it in 
his mouth. Thus he also changed and became a lion. So lion began to 
fight lion, and all the forest was filled with booming (voices of these 
lions), and the gnomes in Igbo Olodumare began to run around. Later, 
the gnome changed and became a python. Python began to fight

python, and all the forest began to shout like animals - tremendous
trouble invaded Igbo Olodumare. Thus they began to change into
different kinds of things until they changed into a cobra. But before
Anjọnnu-ibẹru changed from that, Olowo-aiye had changed into an 
elephant, and when the elephant caught the cobra with his trunk, he
broke the cobra's head completely. Thus my father saw the end of this
gate-keeper, and the fight became proverbial all around the world at 
that time. Up till today, the elders have not stopped talking about this
fight at the gate (of Igbo Olodumare). because it was there that the 
fighters became a cobra and a python, where they also became an
elephant, father of animals.

"At long last, my father turned back into a human being, but we 
never heard about Anjọnnu-ibẹru anymore, for he was completely 
dead. My father took the snake (cobra into which the gate-keeper had
turned) and threw it in the fire, burned it, and threw the ashes in the
garbage. But when it rained, a part of the ashes was washed into one
little river, it was there that these ashes became a poisonous fish until
today. Whenever I see the fish, my friend, I will show it to you. The
part of the ashes that was not washed into the river on the day became
a scorpion. I shall also show you the type of scorpion (that it turned
into) wherever I see it. But the very spot on which they fought the fight
never grew any grass anymore; instead of this, the inhabitants of Igbo 
Olodumare built a house on it, in which the new gate-keeper that they
chose lived; this gate-keeper was not like the one of old, for he loved
both men and animals; he loved the people in the world and those in
heaven.

But what was the end of this fight for my father? The end of it was 
very good indeed. The house which they built for the new gate-keeper 
was a stone-house, and there was an inscription about my father on 
the outside of it. Here are the things they wrote on it:
	
	'This land is in remembrance of the honourable Olowo-aiye,
	one of the children of men who came to Igbo Olodumare to
	hunt. Endurance was the weapon with which Olowo-aiye
	conquered Anjọnnu-ibẹru, who is the gate-keeper of Igbo
	Olodumare. For this reason, he who does not have endurance
	should never go to this forest to hunt, because there is no one
	who does not carry his own load of hardship on the shoulder.
	One's load of hardship is not the same with somebody else's.
	But with endurance, the Lord is ready to assist everyone to
	lay down the load of hardship completely.'

"And that was the way they wrote the inscription (on the wall) of
the house, with my father's name on it until today. But it was a sad
experience for him in that the new gate-keeper did not last for long,
for as it is for human beings, so it is for the gnomes too; because this
gate-keeper did not enslave the people and did not put them in the


pawn category, he saw them as gentlemen/women, and he began 
to play with them —to the extent that they began to disrespect the
edge of his sword — because as it is among men so it is among the 
gnomes. There are some spiteful ones on earth, who never make use 
of the opportunity their God the King has given to them; they are the 
people who make it very difficult for one to be kind to people. If you 
respect them and you treat them like human beings, instead of loving 
you with all their hearts, they would behave spitefully towards you: 
these people are like a tree that obstructs traffic on the highway, which 
dpes not allow automobiles to pass through anymore, for he who 
deals with them once would not want to behave well to others coming 
behind them anymore. Those ones are like waste materials in the
world; may God deliver man from their hands. Please my friends, if 
anyone gives you respect, you should respect the fellow as well; if he 
edifies you, try to edify him continuously too. If a prominent person 
treats you like his neighbour, try to uplift him the more so that he will 
realize that you are not taking him for granted or treating him 
spitefully. Those who do these things are just stumbling blocks for 
others coming behind them, because they make the strong ones tired 
of being kind to people; and the strong people, because of this, ill-treat 
those who are their followers. Why? Because they would say if they 
are good to them, their followers would merely reward them with a 
spiteful treatment. Those who behave like this are guilty before the 
black race, and they are guilty before the white race; they are guilty 
before those who are neither white nor black, and they put God in the 
position where He would say, 'If I had known, I would have created, 
these people as animals, so that they would be grazing in the forest 
around, so that the hunters would chase them with guns from one 
generation to the other.' But God would never say this, because He is 
a merciful God.
"They began to scandalize the (new) gate-keeper around, accusing 
him that he never punished or victimized the people going through 
the gate as he should. Because of this,the gate-keeper changed his 
attitude and began to behave the way that was contrary to the natural 
way in which God had made him. At long last, his attitude Became 
worse than that of Anjọnnu-ibẹru. When these creatures took up a 
heavy yoke and carried a load which is not light on their head they 
conspired against the gate-keeper until the feUow resigned his job and 
came to Igbo Irunmọlẹ and he still lives there until the present time
that I am talking (to you). 
"But we are thankful to God the (heavenly) King in that Igbo 
Irunmọlẹ was more comfortable for him than Igbo Olodumare. 
Because when I personally went to Igbo Irunmọlẹ to hunt, I saw that 
he was not living in a ground-floor building as he used to in Igbo 
Olodumare; I met him in a three-storey building.
"Learn from this, you, my friend; if a person is too strict; the
58

children of the world revile him; if a person is too soft-hearted, the 
children of the world would abuse him as well. But if a person is 
in-between, even if one is reviled by the fools in the world, one would 
command the respect of the wise ones, and one would not be reviled 
by God (the heavenly) King.

“My scribe, well done; let me continue with Olowo-aiye's story 
because that was the important matter that we were talking about 
before I digress into the story of the new gate-keeper who replaced 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru. I left off the story at the point where they had a kind 
of inscription about my father on the wall. Certainly, you would be 
surprised that that was the only thing that they did for my father. It 
is true, they did more than that.
"When my father saw the end of the gnome, all the inhabitants of 
Igbo Olodumare decided to take him to their king. Immediately, they 
took his hunting garment off my father's neck. And they put one big 
flowing garment on his neck; they gave him (native) trousers made 
out of velvet, and put a cap made out of velvet — with a top pointed 
like a crown, ornamented with gold which glittered brightly — on his 
head. They put shoes made of brass on his feet. A gold ring was put 
on his finger. A chain made out of gold was put on his neck. After this, 
they put a staff of beads in his hand. They also took his betrothed wife, 
and they adorned her from head to the sole of her feet — the body of 
that one (the wife) was very clean and was as beautiful as the rainbow 
on the sky. The woman's teeth were shining like a bright 
noon-sunshine. This was the only woman that befitted my father in 
the glory of this Igbo Olodumare. Yes, it is I who told you. My father 
was a very handsome man; only if anyone wants to scoff (would he 
then deny this fact); I did not just say that because he was my father, 
for even the people of our town sang about him (his handsomeness). 
They used to say of him: 'Olowo-aiye is really a handsome man.'
'After they had thus adorned both of them, they put them in a cart, 
and they were rolling them along. It was a great day in this great forest: 
the animals and the birds were shouting 'your highness,' in loud 
voices. All the trees began to bow, and the lianas began to salute 
Olowo-aiye, as he and his wife were proudly going along in the forest 
in their royal greatness.
'When they reached the king of Igbo Olodumare's palace, the 
matter defied response. Because the place was very beautiful, its 
beauty was more than what a mouth can describe. When they got 
to the outside (in the front) of the palace, the king himself was inside 
house. And when he appeared before my father, my father was afraid. 
He immediately fell to the ground and sprinkled some earth on his 
head, and he shouted, 'Your Highness,' and respected him, as a 
king.
'After this, the king answered and said: “Was it you who killed 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru?
59

He answered and said, 'Your highness, it is I.'
And the king asked him again and said, 'What means did you use 
to kill Anjọnnu-ibẹru And what did you depend upon to have done 
that?'
My father also replied and said "May God endow you with long 
life,th emeans that I used was just a short one: I determined to fight 
the gnome, I started fighting, I endured the hardship of the fight, and 
I depended on God the(heavenly) King who made me. Your highness, 
I want you to know with certainty from today, that he who wants to 
achieve a good thing and determines (to do) a good thing, and begins 
a good thing, and endures the hardship that is involvedin that good 
thing, and depends on God the (heavenly) King, that one would never 
be in the midst of the backward one ever.'
This king answered again and said, 'Who is your father?'
My father also answered and said, 'Your highness, it is 
Akowediran.'
The king asked again and said, 'Are you married?'
My father also answered and said, 'I have a fiance, and it is she who 
is sitting by me here in the cart.'
After that, this king shouted in a very loud voice and said, 'You 
powerful man, you child of man,! it is in this place that I shall 
conduct your marriage; there is wisdom in your head, I shall marry a 
wife for you, when it is about two or three months from today. I shall 
send for all of my friends throughout the forest; I shall also send a 
message to the dome of heaven for the people there to come and be 
merry because of your matter. All of you my children, I want you to 
bear in mind that there is not anything that is on this earth that is 
impossible for anyone to do: he who wants to be wealthy can become 
wealthy; he who wants to become an important person can become 
an important person; but a lazy person who does not want to suffer 
(for anything) and wants to be an important person would forever 
remain in the midst of the retrogressive people. A child who 
indentures himself to learn a trade today, who works hard to know 
that trade and trusts in God who created him, let that one fear not, let 
that one continue to persevere, even if he is not able to find a cup of 
gari to drink and does not take more than a spoon of ẹkọ and 
when his master excretes, he is to be responsible for its disposal, and 
if the master wears a garment made of velvet fabric he wears a tattered 
shirt, let him know that he himself would be promoted in the nearest 
future. All those things that he had been doing for his master as a 
learner, others are coming who would do the same things for him as 
well. I tell you the truth, for it does not behove the child of man to lie; 
neither does it behove the child of a gnome.
Take Olowo-aiye who delivered Igbo Olodumare from the hands 
of Anjọnnu-ibẹru, give him a bath, put trousers on him, adorn him 
with more ornaments than these (the ones he has on now). Take him 


and his wife upstairs in my palace over there; let him live there, and 
after some time, I will come to conduct a marriage for Akowediran's child.
“So they did; they began to take care of my father and left his wife 
with him, living together for three months before they conducted their 
wedding for them.
“Within these three months, my father ate food and was plump, 
and the back of his neck was very fat indeed. Even before my father 
left the world, there was not a day when he told the story, that I would 
not burst into laughter. He used to say thus: 'I ate and my stomach 
got terribly protruded like that of a baby bird: a big stomach that drove 
the navel all the way inside. My hip became big and bulky. My wife 
could not go through a narrow doorway anymore, because her legs 
were fatter than the cement pillars of a building; and her hip was 
heavy enough to be a full load for six muscular men. And the back of 
her neck was as big as the size of eight people put together. She herself 
had changed the way she walked: she lifted her legs at intervals as she 
walked along, like those of a grazing cow, and she never behaved like 
a small person anymore: she was behaving like the wife of an 
important person (in the society). Noble men do not want to walk like 
the common men; wealthy people do not want to walk like the poor 
people, and women love to bluff very much. My wife's older sister 
changed too, for her face was smooth like the young leaves on a lime 
tree, and her entire body was clean and light like the body of a 
three-day old baby, for all of us ate tasty and nutritious food; We ate 
delicious soup; we ate the arms of animals; we ate the livers of animals; 
we ate (chicken) gizzards, and we also ate their adam's apples too."
"This was the way my father used to tell the story, all of us would 
laugh; all of us would somersault; all of us would roll around on the 
floor.
“On my father's wedding day, there was a big merriment through- 
out Igbo Olodumare. There were all kinds of food in the king's palace; 
there were poundted yam with okra soup and meat, rice and melon 
oil prepared with onion and pepper, ọka and a jumbo ẹkọ with
ẹfọ soup filled with meat. Beans with small fish and shrimp caught 
in the ocean, which they had roasted and had dried stiff, were cooked 
together and were placed around. Fried yams were nothing, and no 
one cared for fried plantain on this wedding day. And we cannot 
count all the contemporary foods like butter and bread and all kinds 
of European cake up to biscuits of today which wise women make out 
of coconut and European salt. Big drums and bata and ṣẹkẹrẹ 
and tom-tom, violin and bolo and all other kinds of drums made 
by both black and white people, all these things were brought to this 
party: it was a great day (indeed).
"But I am sorry to tell you that the party ended with a fight that 
day, because the animals were separated, and a table was prepared
61

for them. The lion was the chairman, and the elephant was the 
assistant chairman, and the other little animals were waiters. This was 
where the fight began; whenever the lion asked for something to be 
given to him, and the head of the waiters, the antelope, tried to give 
him what he asked for, he would scratch him with his nails; he would 
pull him toward himself as if he wished to eat him, but he would say, 
I'm just kidding. After a while, the antelope could not bear it any 
longer, so he reported him to the bridegroom, and the bridegroom 
rebuked the chairman. So it was with the birds; the ostrich, the father 
of birds, who was invited from Igbo Irunmole to come and chair (the 
birds) could not come because of some domestic hindrance. The eagle 
thus became the chairman in his place. The pets could not attend either 
so they sent six hens as their representatives. Whenever the eagle left 
his seat, he would come to these six hens under the pretense that he 
was simply playing with them. So was it with the fox; he began to 
behave as a hypocrite too; he asked the lion who was the chairman to 
excuse, him, only to come to the place where the birds were sitting, 
and he stared at the chickens — it was very bad behavior indeed.
"But at long last, the animals and the birds became drunk, and they 
began to act foolishly; the elephant began to push the trees down, the 
lion began to kill other animals, the fox killed one of the hens, and 
eagle started chasing the birds around. At last, the bridegroom 
became angry and drove all of them away.
"When the gnomes were coming to this party, men were highly 
terrified: why? It was because of these gnomes' apparent wealth; some 
wore gowns made of beads; some had crowns made with money 
(coins); some would eat with diamond spoon. Others' gowns looked 
like silver. None of them had a leather shoe on. If one did not have a 
pair of shoes made of gold on, that one would have on one made of 
silver; another would put on one made of beads; except those who did 
not have feet — those did not have any shoes — they were simply 
hopping around like frogs. Many were those who were exactly like 
human beings, and the king of Igbo Olodumare was not different from 
you and I. Still, some of them did not compare with humans; they 
were bluffing in their own way. So one-legged Osanyin did not 
forget his only leg because he had a diamond shoe on it. The gnomes 
did not want to eat out of anybody's plate: everyone brought his own 
plate from home, with spoons and cups. Before they left in the 
evening, they gave those precious things to my father as gifts. The 
event was colourful at Igbo Olodumare because the gnomes were 
drunk, and they were dancing to the best of their abilities.
"After he had gone to his house, my father gathered together" all 
those precious gifts they had given him (they became his treasure), 
and they made him a wealthy man for a long, long time. If it were not 
because of thieves (who stole most of those things), the wealth would 
have been in abundance to the extent that those of us (who are his 


children) would not have needed to work for our daily bread. Because 
I want you to remember (that my father had been to school before he 
started hunting, and the wisdom that he had acquired in school was 
helping him to accumulate money. An educated family is never 
stricken with poverty: if they do not have money today, tomorrow 
they will have (money). After this event, when my father got lost in 
Igbo Olodumare, until the time when he killed Ojola-ibinu —who 
is the head of all the snakes in the world — my father also found one 
ado, which he brought back, which brought money to him . You will 
hear about this story subsequently. 
“Thus, the king of Igbo Olodumare spent so (lavishly) for my father 
on this (his) wedding day, that there had been nothing like it since the 
king had ascended the throne.
“On the next morning, my father woke up very early and thanked 
him (the king). When he saw the king, he prostrated flatly, and said, 
'Your Highness, may God prolong your life, may the Lord allow you 
to live long on earth. Death will never sever your life, and disease will 
never tie you up; you will live to be old, you will live to be straight,! 
and you will be our father for a long time. I want you to know that all 
those things that you have done, you have not done them for me: you 
have done them for God the (heavenly) King. I am certain that as 
it is true that the wicked shall reap wickedness, so it is also true that 
the good people shall reap goodness. I know what you have done for 
me, and your reward is in the hands of the Creator of all things; your 
benefit will come from the dome of heaven. The sky is filled with the 
showers of blessings, and they will be shower on you. Your 
Highness, be mindful of those destructive pests that eat up the crops: 
as they spoil yam, so they spoil banana, and they do not allow corn
to cob with grains; God is only speaking to us in parables, for so are 
the thankless people. They are like vicious pests; they always eat up 
their neighbour's roots, so that that one would not grow up, so that 
one would stand still like stagnant water. He to whom kindness is 
done and make's nothing of it, is like the one whose life is saved from 
an accident and sees one's (his rescuer's first son) first- born male and 
shoots him (dead); the judgement of such a person is not in the hands 
of man: it is in the hands of God (the heavenly) King. Your highness, 
I know the good things you have done for me. May God enable me to 
show you torough my actions that I have placed you in an important 
spot in my heart.
“Thus my father had spoken; he thanked his benefactor, and that 
one (the king) was happy that he did not show kindness to an ingrate 
and did not put a sányán gown around a pig's neck; he did not put
pants on a baboon; neither did he wrap cupped underwear around the 
waist of a woman, and he did not promote a hypocrite as the chairman 
of a union; neither did he make a treacherous person the moderator of a 
meeting, and he did not take care of an undeserving person.
63

"The king answered and said, Olowo-aiye, thank you very much. 
I am grateful to you. These are the types of things that we expect the 
children of the world to do (always), among the black, among the 
whites, among those that are neither black nor white, that the young 
should give to the adult, his due place, and the adult likewise to the 
young; that the servant should give the master his due place and the
master likewise to the servant; that the husband should give the wife 
her due place, and the wife should also give the husband his due place. 
This is the purpose of my speech: you, Olowo-aiye, you got up very 
early in the morning in this cold weather, you came to my house, you 
sat down, and you began to honour me; you did not see me as slave, 
nor looked at me as a bond man; you did not say; 'What will this 
ragged old man do? Instead, you began to say good things about me: 
thank you very much as a person who is appreciative of good things 
done to you. This is not true of another person to whom much more 
had been done, and on the next day, he began to look at one right on 
the tip of one's nose. And when one asked: 'Can't you even greet us?' 
he answered and said, 'Do I owe you anything?' Therefore, I want you 
to know that which I did for you yesterday was small (compared to 
that which is coming in the future), may God spare our lives; may He 
grant that we know each other for a long time; for when there is life, 
everything else is trivial; life surpasses everything else. But I want to 
tell you something —there is so much sorrow among the sons of men, 
so much that we gnomes do not want to live among them. If it were 
not because the children of the world (try to) endure sorrow, they 
would be taking their own lives every day. God loves mankind, but 
man alienates himself from God the (heavenly) King, and a sinner 
does not go unpunished; the sins of the children of the world do not 
allow them to enjoy the world. If you are interested in hunting, take 
your gun and go hunting; you can always come back to the palace to 
pass the night. I would like you to think over this matter; for it does 
not behove the young to reject the suggestions of the adult? except 
if the suggestion is misleading. Once more, I thank you for your 
coming; greet your wife for me, and greet her older sister as well.
"This was the way the king spoke to my father, and, as it behoved 
him, my father also thanked him; he also promised that he would go 
home and put the matter before his wife, and after they had 
deliberated on it, he would bring an answer to the king. After this they 
greeted each other, the king entered into the room, and my father also 
got out (of the house).
"When my father got home, he told his wife, and when both of 
them thought about it, they agreed to stay with the king for a long 
time and, if possible, they would make the place their permanent place 
of abode. This was the way the first important part of my father's 
biography ended.
' 'The second part is very interesting also, but, my friend, let us leave 
64

that one until tomorrow morning. The second part would not be 
difficult for you to write for my father had written that down with his 
own hand before his death. The note that he wrote on is not with me 
now; it is at home, and when I bring it with me tomorrow, I shall put 
myself in my father's place; I shall read it to you, and you will write 
down whatever I say, so it would seem as if it were my father who 
had come to your house telling you the story of his own life. Good 
bye; expect me very early tomorrow morning.
This was the way he spoke that day, and since he was a gentleman, 
he never failed in his promise. Because of this, immediately when it 
was dawn the following day, I began to prepare. I had put my writing 
materials down before he came.
65

Elephant-killing Hunter Went Astray in 
the Forest of God: It was a Tug-of-War

When he entered my house on the second day, he showed me the book 
which his father wrote with his own hand. In this book, his father told 
the story of his own life, from the time he was the king of Igbo 
Olqdumare, until the time he came back home.
After Akara-ogun had shown this to me, he sat down on the chair 
totally relaxed, and told me to pretend that he was Olowo-aiye. So, he 
put himself in his father's position and was reading the book to me. 
And I also took my pen; I sat as someone writing ought to sit, and I 
continued to work. The words which Olowo-aiye wrote in the book 
would constitute the second part of this book. Ihese are his words:
"I, Olowo-aiye, the son of Akowediran, a handsome man, I came 
to Igbo Olodumare to hunt; I met with difficulty on the way, but God 
delivered me from them all. At last I reached the king of Igbo 
Olodumare; it was the king who paid for the wedding ceremony, the 
wedding ceremony of my wife, who bore my son Akara-ogun. The 
king spent very much for my wedding. He spent money as well as his 
energy; he took care of me as it behoves one who loves a person (to 
care for the one whom he loves). Therefore, I think that I should start 
to write my autobiography down, because my eyes have seen some ­
thing in the past. This king's behaviour has shown me (the fact)  that 
whatever one's eyes have seen in the world ought to be written down 
for those who are coming after (to read), because the world is filled 
with pits, plain fields, and hills. I, who had fought Anjọnnu- ibẹru 
who was the gate-keeper of Igbo Olodumare, I who seemed as if I 
were then about to end my li(e in the world, 1 also found myself in the 
cart; after that, with my betrothed wife, I again became one who was 
living in a multi-storey building; I became one who got married, and 
the news of whose marriage spread throughout the world; even the 
inhabitants of heaven knew about it. I have to write the rest of my 
autobiography, because I do not know what is coming ahead.
"It was God who gave the king of Igbo Olodumare wisdom: he 
66






would not dare behave like an unwise fellow, who would seek the 
downfall of a stranger, because he knew that a city which hates 
strangers hurts itself, for it would be easier for a three-year old child 
to be the chairman, of a city committee, than for a city which hates 
strangers to have any progress. I cannot forget the palace forever; the 
king of Igbo Olodumare really took care of me.
"When it had been six months since I began living in this king's 
palace, my wife's pregnancy was three months. When my wife being 
with my first child's (Akara-ogun's) pregnancy, I prepared in the 
morning of one day; I left for the forest to hunt. By this time I had 
become an elephant-killing hunter.
"My wife accompanied me to the road (to the forest), and when the
was about to turn back, she told me to try to come back on time, 
because she would be lonely. After this, she prayed for my success in 
finding enough game. She also requested that I bring a partridge home 
for her, (if I could find, one), because she wanted so much to eat 
partridge; so it is with women when they are pregnant; they do not 
have appetite for just any food; they are always picky, and he who 
does not take care of a pregnant woman, is not a human being —he 
should be called a viper in human skin —a viper is a poisonous snake, 
but an earthworm gently plays around (without hurting any one}. 
Therefore, I was taking care of my wife at this time; I was really 
indulging her very much, and when she talked about partridge, I 
determined to look for it at all cost. Moreover, when pepper and onion 
fall upon a partridge, things are bound to be all right. After this, 
my wife went a little bit farther with me, and I greeted her, saying: 'Go 
back my beautiful wife; watch (our) home until my arrival; I shall not 
stay long: prepare rice for me before I come, because it was a jumbo eko 
that I ate yesterday, and I ate one the day before yesterday too. I shall try 
to bring some game; and if my hand gets hold of a partridge, then things 
would certainly be good; should anyone look for me, tell the fellow that 
I have quickly left for the outside of the city-wall.
"I had not gone very far, when I came to a part of Igbo Olodumare, 
and I was very surprised because there trees had no roots, and they 
stood straight, yet they had very green leaves; the animals there spoke 
like humans, and so did the birds.
"When I entered into this forest, I did not see anything at all, I never 
saw animals, neither did I see a bird: squirrels did not even pass on 
the tree before me. I walked for a long time. But I did not see a thing.
"After a while, a (strong) wind began to blow; all those rootless 
trees began to do obeisance, and they were standing back up. The 
wind was great indeed — blowing here and there, all the trees and 
lianas were bumping into one another.
"The situation was very, very difficult; were it not because of my 
Creator's mercies, the trees would have hit and killed me — God is 
indeed a great King.
67


"After a while, when one of those tall trees did obeisance by my 
side, I quickly sat on it before it stoop up, and when the wind blew 
again, I went up with the tree. And the tree was very tall; if a person 
looked at me from the ground, I would have looked very tiny (up 
there). First, I was happy when I reached up there, because I saw the 
whole panorama of the area very clearly; all the shrubs were deeply 
green, and the landscape was very beautiful. But after a while, I 
realized that instead of rejoicing (for being up there), I should be 
crying. Because after I got up there, the wind ceased to blow. Liana 
stood the way it was before; the trees ceased to do obeisance. If I had 
known, I should have quickly jumped down when the wind was 
blowing, but now that the tree was standing up, my coming down 
would not be without some difficulty, for I could not jump from such 
a high place; if I did, my arms and legs would have broken into pieces. 
The tree was so tall, and its trunk was so sleek, that no one could get 
down from its top by himself at all. This depressed me, and I began 
to regret what had prompted me to behave so stupidly.
"As I was thinking about these things, I saw an antelope which was 
passing by, and I called on him, I said 'Antelope! Please take me 
out of this bondage. It was a tree that fell that I sat upon, and when 
the wind began to blow the tree that fell down stood up, and that is 
the reason why you see me siting down on the top of the tree. May 
God forbid your being imprisoned at such a peak of an afternoon as 
this. The owner of this day will not allow you to starve for speech. 
My dear antelope, you are (very) important among animals, because 
you have both white and brown colours, and your feet are strong, and 
you have pointed horns on your head. A farmer who does not respect 
you would never find yams to eat; a farm owner who thinks you are 
worth nothing would continue to labour for nothing. Therefore, I 
adjure you, for God the (heavenly) King's sake, do not refuse; try to 
take me out of my predicament, so that I may get out of this place 
where I am locked on top of this tree. If you take me down, I will not 
forget you forever, and I will take you to someone's farm where there 
is a lot of okra; you'll eat and your belly will stick out.
"After I had said so, the antelope answered me, but his answer was 
contrary to my expectation. He said, 'You are the one on the tree; I 
really sympatize with you very much, but there is nothing I can do 
for you. Those of us who are antelopes do not climb trees, because we 
are different from snakes and squirrels, and we are not in the same 
category with the apes and the brown monkeys. Even if I were able to 
climb up, I would have even gone on my way, at least for this time, 
before I would come back to help you. As you see me today, I am on 
an errand for the animals, because today is their meeting-day. Little 
things matter: he who is given a small thing and does not thank one 
(the giver), is an ingrate; he who does not say pẹlẹ is ignorant; 
therefore, I want to go, because I'm in a hurry. Even though your 
68






words are like bribery, because you promised to show me an okra 
farm, still I will not be able to give you any advice. There is no bribery 
in Igbo Olodumare, because thepath of bribery is a crooked one, but 
the path of truth is wide and very clean —goodbye.
"It was not long after the antelope left that I saw a hare passing by; 
I tried again; I called on him and I said,-'Hare!' He answered me, and 
he said, Who are you calling me from the top of the tree?'
And I answered him and I said, 'It is I,the son of a man, calling you 
from the top of the tree; I want you to help me so that I may quickly 
get down from this top-most height of the tree. It was the wind that 
blew which made the tree fall on the ground, and I sat on it; and all of 
a sudden when the wind ceased blowing, the tree stood up while I 
was still on it, and I went up with the tree, and coming back down has 
become a problem for me. But as soon as I saw you, I felt relieved for 
who is that animal in the forest that would say that he does not know 
you, Mr. Hare? You are not like some others whose inner eyes have 
gone blind; for if one's inner eyes have been blinded, one would not 
see one's own vicious behaviour. If you have seen someone who is 
shameless, I want you to know that the inner eyes of that fellow are 
blinded. But you, Mr. Hare, your inner eyes are clearly open. You are 
a powerful one among the animals; you can run much faster than most 
of them. And your ears are not small, compared to how big you are. 
Therefore, please be not unhelpful to me in this matter; and advise me 
on the way I can get down from the top of the tree where I am."
'This was the way I spoke sweetly, but still the hare's reply was 
different from my expectation.'
He answered and said; 'A matter that is as soft as a ripe banana 
does not demand an answer that is as hard as the sleek pebbles in the 
stream. I like your speech, and if I were not sent on an errand, I would 
have stayed with you here, and I would have tried my best possible; 
I would have seen to it that you got down from where you are on the
top of the tree. But do not let this matter make you sad, for there are 
others coming behind me, and if you do not lessen your effort in telling 
the passers by, things would soon be all right. But I seriously 
admonish you, do not be like the people without understanding, who 
are wise in their own sight, who would not tell people about their 
problems; those people cover up nettle around themselves with 
cloth: thus terrible matters would cling to them closely, and if they 
(keep their problems inside) and laugh outwardly in the sight of the 
children of the world, sadness would then sit relaxed on a chair in the 
corner of their hearts.
"Please let me go on my way, because today is the committee 
meeting of the animals. Those who sent me on an errand are elderly 
people — and he who wants to grow old, should not take elders' 
matters frivolously —sorry, (Mr.) Elephant-hunter, I sympathize with 
you in your travail, goodbye for now; may your head bring you
69






down, where your stupidity has taken you up there."
'When the hare finished his speech, he took to his heels and ran 
with all his might: I was left alone on the tree. My lips were dried, the 
saliva in my mouth became sticky, and my stomach was flat; my eyes 
saw a lot of trouble. I sat roundly on the tree; I looked like a brown 
monkey and was comparable to the baboon; I remembered home; I 
remembered friends; I missed my wife; I suffered in six hundred 
ways; I was disgraced in eight hundred ways. I made a great hiss; I 
cried the cry of an adult; I put on a frowned face; I looked up; I looked 
down; I thought for a long time, but I couldn't find anything with 
which to do anything.
'It wasn't too long after this, when a rat was passing by; I had to try 
very hard to be able to recognize that it was a rat (that was passing 
by) because in the place where I was, so far from the ground, every ­
thing looked very tiny. I called on him, and I said, "Rat!"
He too answered, and said, 'Who is calling me rat I, a pilgrim in the 
forest, I, a pilgrim in the jungle, I, who go around in life through the 
midst of liana and trees?"
I too replied, and I said, "It is I, Olowo-aiye, that am calling you. I, 
the son of Akowediran. I, an elephant-hunter, the husband of 
Ajẹdiran, who has come to hunt in the forest, and wait delicately 
on this tree. Please help me, rat, you who are strolling around; there 
is no one who is small in the sight of God the (heavenly) King, except 
a hypocritical person, who invites a thief to come and steal and goes 
to tell the owner of the farm to watch his farm (closely), and the owner 
of the farm thanks him, and so does the thief — thus the judgntent 
against a hypocrite is in the vault of heaven. You rat of Igbo Olodu- 
mare, you are small in the sight of men (though you are bigger than 
a pouch rat found in some places), but I want you to know one thing: 
you are not small in the sight of God the King. You are not a hypocrite 
who keeps blood inside, and spits white saliva out; who praises a 
person in his presence, and slanders him behind his back. My dear rat, 
let me tell you a little story: one day a hypocrite and I were in a union; 
when he observed that one man was going to spoil the union, all of 
us unanimously agreed that he should leave the union. Immediately 
after we dismissed the meeting, he secretly sneaked to the man and 
told him that he was not part of the plan against the man. At long last, 
all the members of the union heard about it, and the hypocrite felt very 
ashamed. When we asked (him) about the matter, the hypocrite 
answered like a stammerer. We all felt like dropping his head off. My 
dear rat, you are not like this, and I am begging you to demonstrate your 
righteousness to me and deal with me in your truthfulness and tell me 
plainly the way I can get myself down from this confinement, where (my) 
stupidity has taken me, on the very top here.
"Thus did I speak to this rat and he also gave me an appropriate 
answer, and he said: 'You hunter who are on the top of the tree, I am 
70

grateful to you for your good words about me. Be courageous, and be 
more patient. Those who are heads had to be patient before they got 
to the position of being the leaders. Those who are leaders had to be 
patient in order to prevent themselves from leading the people under 
them astray. It was patience that God had which prevented Him from 
destroying the children of the world completely. Today is the day of 
the assembly of the animals, where all kinds of animals gather 
together and deliberate on their lives. It was because I was hungry 
that I had to sneak out of their midst, for if hunger is eliminated from 
poverty, there is not much poverty left to talk about; but take note of 
the words that I will speak to you now, so that you will get off soon, 
for so many people who have acted the same way as you have acted 
now, have died on the tree. When the meeting is over, you will hear 
the bell; after the bell, you will feel a strong wind; the wind will be 
stronger than the one that first blew (before you sat on the tree). At 
this time, you should find your way out. But the wind will be very 
strong. Indeed, for as the trees make their worship, they will get up 
again. Please be careful so that a tree does not hit you on your head, 
so that it will not be blown out and you consequently become a 
pilgrim to heaven. My speech to you is not more than this. I am now 
going to look for food; after I have eaten food, I shall come back to see 
you; goodbye. Your preseverance in this chaos is commendable; may 
your Creator bring you down from where you are precariously sitting 
on the tree.
This was the way the rat spoke to me, and I thanked him very 
much, and I said, "I am grateful to you (Mr.) Rat, may God protect 
your privacy, may God spare our children; I understood your 
language very clearly; I heard you, and I will be expecting to hear the 
bell, and I will be prepared for the wind, and I will not let a tree come 
near my head. You should also be careful; go gently; it is the child of 
the land owner that steps on the land with care, but the son of a 
stranger steps on it carelessly. Do not be caught in a trap, for if you 
are hit by the trap in a bad place, it would not be good, If it hits 
you on the head, your head may break; if it hits you on your leg, your 
leg may be cut off, and that may make one go limping around. Have 
a good day (Mr.) Rat; greetings to your people at home. After getting 
down (from the top of the tree), I will come to know your hole, and if 
I'm not able to get down, that means that we would not be able to see 
each other again.
'After I had finished my speech, (Mr.) Rat went on his way, looking 
for his daily bread. I was thus left alone; I sat precariously on the tree. 
After a long while, I began to hear the bell; this was the sign which 
told me that the animals had finished their meeting. Thus I quickly 
sat attentively and held on to a liana which curled around the tree on 
which I was; I was expecting the strong wind which (Mr.) Rat spoke 
to me about I did not know that the liana which I clung to came from
71

another tree. So when the wind began to blow, and the tree on which 
I was sitting was about to worship, the tree from which the liana which 
I was holding rose up, so I began to swing in the air (holding on to the 
liana). I was still in this (mess) when the one on which I was sitting 
finished doing obeisance, but I was expecting this time that it would 
get back up to come and meet me. Immediately it came back up, I 
dropped the liana and held on to the tree. After this, my own tree went 
back again to worship. As its top went down, I jumped down before 
it got back up.
'When I came down, I was tired, because I had stayed very long on 
the top (of the tree). I began to get hungry, and my stomach became 
very flat, so I gently sat in a corner resting.
'It was not long after I sat down to take a rest when I heard a noise 
coming behind me; as I took a look (toward the direction of the noise), 
I saw all kinds of animals coming back from the meeting, and they 
were coming towards my direction. I was terribly afraid; I couldn't 
even think of shooting any of them. There were many powerful 
animals among them. I quickly took my gun and took to my heels. 
(But) what surprised me was that wherever I went, these animals also 
went; it seemed as if it was me that they were actually looking for — 
(that was not so), for they were just going on their way — it only 
seemed in my eyes as if they were following me.
"As I was running around, I saw a shelter under a certain big liana, 
which was full of leaves and had all kinds of rubbish (under it); it . 
looked like an awusa tree, and was very big. I stuck my head into
this debris. When I pulled my head out, it was full of all kinds of dried 
leaves and a lot of chips of wood.
'After I came out, I rested a while. As I was resting, I lifted up my 
eyes and saw a lot of big birds flying around (in the air), and I killed 
one of them. I made a fire and roasted that one, and I ate it completely. 
After this, I went by one little stream that was flowing down from the 
top of one rock and used a large leave to take some water to drink.
'When I had rested a little after this, I got up to look for the way I 
needed to take to get back to my lodging place at the king of Igbo 
Olodumare's (place), but I could not find the way at all. I went back 
and forth; there wasn't even a place that seemed like a known place 
to me at all. This was the position I was until it was dark on that day.
'To cut the long story short, I want all people in the world to 
know what I did: I got lost in the forest for three complete years.
'During this pertod in which I got lost, I cannot tell people with my 
mouth; It is difficult for my hand to write for the people of the world 
about all the strange things and the deep things that I saw, that I heard, 
that I interacted with which also met with me. Even though it is true 
that he who has an important matter in his mind and cannot find 
anyone with whom to share the matter, is like one who is hungry and 
finds food, but must not eat it;, yet an elderly man should not tell 
72
everything which he had seen.'I shall (thus) tell very little of those 
things which my eyes saw during these three years before I began to 
see the light about my matter.
'For one whole year, it was fruit that constituted my main food. I 
shot several times with my gun, to the extent that I ran out of gun 
powder in my pocket, but the animal which I had killed before I ran 
out of gun powder did a lot of good. When I ran out of gun powder, 
I began to set traps with rope on the tracks of the animals, and I was 
using my machete to kill fish in the water. But yet I was walking 
around the forest, looking,for the fruits of the trees to eat.
'I made a home out of a cave. After it had been a while since I had 
been living in the cave, I repaired it very well, and I made all kinds of 
rooms out of it. I made my bedstead separately; I gathered small 
leaves with lots of large leaves. I made a pillow out of this (covered 
leaves) which I put on my bedstead. I got a huge rock with which I 
made a door. I made small holes on the top of fixe cave, which became 
windows. Even though my cave was made of rock on all sides, a part 
of its top was earth; that part was the part in which I made my holes. 
The big animals that were living in the hole before my arrival had left 
the place since I had been there.
"As I was going around in the forest, I found a lot of snails. It was 
their shells that I was using to fetch water, and I lined them up in rows 
in my cave. This was what I was doing, enjoying the little happiness 
that I had as I continued to go on with my life (in the forest).
"When it had been eight months since I came in the forest, a very 
strong wind blew one day, the wind was so strong that the air was 
filled with debris. As I was looking up; I suddenly saw a sheaf of corn
which was being carried around by the wind, and I was observing 
where the sheaf of corn was going to fall. When it fell, it fell on a little 
stream which was flowing, but which was getting dry. So I began to 
pursue the sheaf of corn very quickly, until it came to one liana which 
was on some stagnant water; it was there that I caught up with it, and 
I picked it up. The reason why I followed the sheaf of corn was that I 
wanted to look at it (closely) to be able to determine whether or not it 
came from a place close by. By this, I might see a sign that would 
assure me that I could still get out of my confinement.
"When I looked at the sheaf of corn, I could not see any sign which 
indicated to me that it came from a place close to me at all, because all 
my observations showed that it came from a place very far away from 
Igbo Olodumare. But a thing of joy which I found in this sheaf ofcorn
when I examined it very closely, was a dried grain of com. When I 
thought (seriously) for a long time about what I could possibly do 
with this grain of corn and could not find anything (I could do with 
it), I said, "Please God, teach me the wisdom about what to do with 
this grain of corn." After this, I took the sheaf of corn into my cave, 
and I slept uintil the next morning. When it was dawn, it seemed as if
73

my heart did not sleep throughout the time that I was sleeping; it was 
thinking about this grain of corn, because that way, all the things 
about which one thinks (seriously) are always easy to do, if one sleeps 
(for a while), and one's mind gets to rest (a little). As soon as I woke 
up, my mind told me to go and make a little farm and plant the grain 
of corn in it. Finally, this corn grew, almost like (child's) play. The corn
brought forth more grains (on the cob): it brought forth two big cobs. 
When they came to maturity, I did not eat them; I kept them until they 
were dried; and both had a lot of grains. When the raining season 
came, I planted all the grains that I had on one large farm which I 
made, and when my corn came to maturity, I began to eat. But 
whoever saw me at this time would not be able to recognise me, 
because my clothes were filthy; it was true I tried to wash them in the 
water, but it did not work, because there was no soap. I bathed, but 
leaves were my sponge; the worst of all things about me was that 
the hair on my head and my eyes were covered with hair to the point 
that it seemed as if my hair had built a home for my eyes. After a while, 
when I had gone by one little pond to see myself — used water as 
a mirror —when I got to this pond, and looked down, and saw myself,
I was terribly scared, for there was no difference between me and a 
gorilla at all. After a while, when I thought (about it), I saw that a 
person does not take care of himself for others to see, but a person 
takes care of himself so that he would enjoy (feel better about) himself . 
He who takes care of himself just for others alone to see him, (that one) 
is a filthy person.
"Because of this, I decided to take care of myself. I did not have a 
knife at all, except a machete, and I began to sharpen my machete. I 
sharpened it for a whole day, and its edge became very sharp. After 
this, I took the machete, and used it to shave my beard. But it was only 
my beard that I could use the machete for; I had to leave the 
(over-grown) hair of my head, only to carry it around.
"But besides the hair on my head and my beard, since I had been 
in the forest, I had not been sad because I knew that wisdom of the 
elders which says ho matter how low the condition of the son of 
man is in this world, it behoves one to make use of (whatever) oppor-
tunity one has in a befitting way; it is only a fool who says "mine is 
finished (no more for me) in the world;" when there is life, there is 
hope. My thought at that time was this: that even if I were alone, still 
there was life, and the wisdom in my head was different from that 
of an animal, and God who made a mouth for me would not be 
without the knowledge of the way He would let me find sometiung 
to put in it. Thus I decided that if that was the place in which I was 
going to spend the rest of my life, I might as well spend it with joy; 
but if my Creator said that that was not the place (where I would 
spend the rest of my life), a day was coming when he would get me 
out.
74

"But something happened when it became three whole years that 
I had been in the forest; this was it: it happened one day, when I 
strolled into the forest, in search of fruit; I saw a lot of tortoises, but I 
did not see many snails, and I was very angry, because the snail was 
bigger than the kind of tortoises we used to see (around). It was not 
long as I went around the forest when a heavy rain began to fall, and 
I had not reached my camp (ground), so I went to hide in one little 
cave. But this rain was very strong, and the wind was blowing terribly 
(as well). It was not too long after I got into the cave, when a torrent 
drove me out, and I went to hide in another cave. In this second cave, 
the torrent drove me out again. The rain was falling very hard, and 
the wind was very, very strong; I had not experienced such (rain and 
wind) since I had been lost in the forest. At long last, the rain stopped, 
and I got prepared, and turned my head towards my camp. When I 
got there, one big tree had fallen right in front of my cave. The tree 
had rolled the stone out of the entrance of my cave. When I looked 
into my cave, the torrent had filled it to the brim, and I was looking 
at the snail shells with which I had fetched water very clearly (floating) 
on the water, and the tortoise shells which I had used as plates for 
food; all of them looked like boats on the surface of the water. The 
worst of the whole matter was that the fire had been put out, and I 
had only one stick of match left in the match box before I left, and the 
rain had beaten the only stick of match to the extent that I almost lost 
hope immediately. I bellowed in a loud voice saying, I and mine are 
in thy hands, oh God the (heavenly) King.'
"I thought for a long time, and I did not know what to do; I took 
my bag, I took my gun, and I headed into theforest, and I kept going.
"After a while, I came into one fruit garden: it was full of all kinds 
of sweet fruits, those that I had tasted since theday I had been lost (in 
the forest). I saw pawpaw, orange, pineapple, mango, red bananas, 
lime, and all kinds of trees which came to the land from the four 
corners of the world.
"I looked around to see if these fruits belonged to someone. Since 
Igbo Olodumare was filled with strange things, I thought the orchard 
was there for the welfare of those who got lost in the forest, so I began 
to eat. After I had eaten and was very full, I sat and leaned my back 
on a tree, and I slept.
"I was deeply asleep, because I was tired before I slept. As I began 
to dream a sweet dream, somebody woke me up. When I opened my 
eyes, I saw the fellow; he was a very handsome young man who wore 
a white gown and had a white cap on and white pants, too. I greeted 
him, and he greeted me too. After he had greeted me, he asked me a 
question, and he said, "What are you looking for in the midst of our 
garden?" ,
I answered and I said, "How many of you does the garden belong
to?"
75

"He answered and said, "It is my father's garden."
'I asked and I said, "Who is the father who begat you?"
He answered me, and he said, "It is a father who surpasses 
another fellow's father that begat me."
'This made me to talk (further), and I said, "Even if the father who 
begat you surpasses another fellow's father, still the father who begat 
you does not surpass the father who begat me. The father who begat 
me was Akowediran, (and) Akowediran's father was Idakeroro- 
ode (and) Idakeroro-ode was enough a father for Akowediran, and 
Akowediran was enough a father for me, Olowo-aiye. Therefore 
there is no father who is bigger than the father who begat me. 
Therefore, I plead with you wholeheartedly, let me know the big father who 
begat you.
'When I was through with my talking, the man looked at me and 
hissed, and he did not respond to my speech, but instead, he turned 
around and begun to leave, as if he was going to report me to someone 
important who would punish me for what I had done.
"But I observed the way the man went; after a while, I looked
round, and noticed that it was about to rain again; within a short 
while, I began to hear some noise. It was only the noise of the wind. 
When the wind blew over me, my eyes saw a lot of trouble, because 
this wind was even stronger than the one that drove me out of my 
cave. When the wind reached me, (what happened) was beyond what 
a mouth could describe: all the trees were bumping their heads against 
each other; liana was bumping against liana; the leaves filled the air; 
and palm leaves were naked; trees were squeaking, and a host of them 
were falling by my side. I was in this condition when the rain started 
to fall, and the rain beat me to the extent that I began to gnash my 
teeth. I ran to hide myself under debris, but I did not feel 
comfortable, I hid myself in a tree-hole but the wind was still 
blowing against me, and my clothes were all wet, and they clung to 
my body. This was the time that I began to doubt if I was still capable 
of doing anything again in this world. I was very down-hearted, and 
some bad, bad thoughts came into my mind; I felt like committing 
suicide. 
As I was thinking about these things, I looked in front of me, and 
I saw a very big rock. I got up and went into this rock. When I got 
there, I saw a narrow path which went through the rock. I followed 
this path, so I could find a place to hide my head, but to my amaze- ­
ment, as soon as I walked for about six steps, I found myself in one 
big house which was very, very big and was very beautiful as well, 
Since I began going around in this world, I had not seen such a house; 
it was even more beautiful than the palace of the king of Igbo 
Olodumare. In the four corners of the house, I saw little birds which 
looked like swallows and they lined up in rows. There were many of 
them, and I do not think they were less than one thousand, at all. If a
76

person first glanced at them, he would pot think that they were alive, 
because they did not move; each stood (rigidly) in its position. The 
birds were sleek; they were yellow gold, and their chests were
as bright as silver, and their beaks were like ivory. As I was 
standing to look at them, I suddenly heard them singing all at the same 
time; they were praising God. The song was so melodious that I forgot 
where I came from; I never remembered my suffering anymore. I 
opened my mouth to the extent that I was almost drooping.
"As I was listening to this melodious song, I suddenly saw one door 
open by the wall dose to me, and there was no door there when I came 
in; when I looked at the doorway, I saw one terrifying lion coming 
towards me. As I turned to start runnig I could not find the 
way through which I came in anymore. I was running back and forth; 
I did not know what to do, so I hid myself in one of the corners in the 
house, expecting the lion to come right on to eat me up. The lion's 
body was brass, and was glittering and was very beautiful. It was a 
surprise to me, that when it was about six steps before the lion was to 
reach me, it stopped and bellowed and its voice was like that of 
twenty-thousand thunders that struck at the same time.
"It was not long after this when I saw one beautiful woman; she 
was coming right in front of me, and I observed that there were many 
strange creatures following her. They were very beautiful, and their 
bodies were very cool and sleek like that of a day-old baby, and their 
clothes were glittering, shedding light like the noon-sunshine. When 
this woman got close to me and reached where the brass (skinned) 
lion was standing, she said, "You, the Creator's lion, the lion of brass, 
you to whom a command was given to guard the gate of the graves, 
get out of the way for me. I took permission from God before I left 
heaven; I have crossed a black sea which is the Sea of Indigo; I have 
passed through the red sea which is the Sea of Blood, and I have told 
thousands of the dead who are expecting the judgement of God the 
King."
"After the woman had spoken this way, the lion moved back. The 
woman brought out a big book and showed it to this lion, It was a 
letter of authority with the seal of God; when she showed this to the 
animal; the ground shook, the ground opened its mouth, and the brass 
lion went away through a hole in the ground.
"After the lion had left, this woman entered the house in which I 
was, she and the beauties who followed her. When I looked at her very 
well (and very closely), she was my mother; thus, I ran towards her 
to giver her a big hug, but she disappeared; I simply hugged the air. 
I ran again to hug her the second time, but I hugged nothing again; I 
ran again, the third time to hug her again; I hugged the air. So I burst 
into tears, and the the animals behind her burst into laughter, but my 
mother began to cry with me. Ha! There is no one like a mother; 
women love children.
77






My mother spoke and said: "My child, Olowo-aiye my child. My 
eyes have been following you all the way in your journey. When I 
could no longer bear it, I sought permission in heaven to come and 
see you (in person).
"Truly me children of the world are very wise,, and the people in 
heaven have a lot of understanding, but no creature on earth or in 
heaven knows where the key of a mother's love for her child is; except 
God alone. A child who is spiteful to his mother has broken the fifth 
commandment of God, that one has worn an irksome gown over 
the crown of his head and has oovered himself with destructive 
cloth. Olowo-aiye your father told me to treat you gently and asked 
me to greet you very well; he is at rest on his pillow of liberty, which 
God had prepared for the dead who have spent their lives very well. 
You, my child, do not be daunted; your life is bound to be good. It is 
a lazy person that fears difficulty; there is no difficulty before a 
powerful man; the important people look at impediment as if it were 
nothing at all, and a mountain looks like a plain before those who are 
powerful. Do not fear difficulty. A man is not daunted by difficulty. 
A merchant who sustained loss at one time, and quits his business 
because of that has spoilt the world; a farmer whose crops went 
bad in one year and who quits farming, has spoilt his own name, and 
he who works lazily at his work does not do evil to any one else, but 
himself. For a lazy person would never be able to stand in the midst 
of important people; he would only be dealing with people in a low 
category, and the lazy ones will not be able to stand in an assembly of 
the progressive ones: they will always be in the midst of those who 
are behind forever.
'You, my son I heard that you have got married; please, take care 
of your wife. Both tongue and the mouth fight (at times), but we have 
never heard at any time that a tongue went to report the matter to the 
eyes and the nose, that they should come and settle the fight between 
them (tongue and the mouth). Do not let anyone get between you and 
your wife, no matter how close to you that one may be. Because the 
day that you offer the third person a chance to come between you, 
your love would be like water which someone has gone to fetch with 
a gourd from the river, and when he had come back, the man's friend 
takes a club and hits the gourd, and the gourd of water breaks, and 
the water in it flows out and flows to the east and to west, to the south 
and to the north, and no one can gather the water together again.
"You, my son, do not forget the truth inside you; it is stronger than 
medicine; it is an axe which one cuts conspiracy; it is a whip
with which one beats hypocrisy; it is a chain with which one binds 
envy and hangs it on the tree. Truthfulness from within will lead you 
from one promotion to the other; it will lead you from one high 
position to the other; it will add more money to your money, it will 
add more children to your children; it will add more people to the 
78

people (around you), and it will make you very important in the midst 
of all the children of the world. Truth from within will give you a great 
name; those who are backbiting you will (praise and) respect you in 
your presence; those who were cursing in secret will bow very low 
when you happen to meet them;you would trample murderers under 
your feet, and the double-dealer will be down-hearted, and the one 
who befriends people only in good times would stand by you in your 
affliction; a powerful person will be soft like a red banana before you, 
and an unfortunate person will not come in your way. Therefore, 
Olowo-aiye always deal wifh people with truth from within you from 
now until you put off the human body, when you will close your eyes, 
when you will do as I did, when you will come to meet me in heaven.
"About your wife do not be afraid. She has delivered a baby, and 
the baby is not just an ordinary baby; it is the baby who will edify your 
name in the future. The child will not die young, and he will not grow 
into affliction. The children of the world will not be able to overcome 
him. You shall name him Akara-ogdn, because a wizard will not be 
able to devour him, and a witch will not be able to come near him, and 
a (vicious) medicine-man will not be able to harm him.
"'You, my son, I will not be able to say more than this; the children 
of men spend (their) time as if it would never end, but a minute has 
its purposes in heaven.'
'Thus did my mother speak, and when she ended her speech, she 
gave me a big cake and said, "Look, it is a cake from heaven; I brought 
it for you; eat it in your wandering up and down; this is more delicious 
than the children of men's cake; it can never finish, no matter how 
much you eat it, but I shall get the rest out of your hand on the day 
you get back home.'
"When my mother had finished her speech, I also answered and 
said, 'My mother, what kind of love is as great as this? The one who 
left the comfort of heaven behind and came to me in the 
uncomfortable world! With what can I compare you, my mother? You 
who were so good in the world, and are also very good in heaven. 
When you were in the world, you took care of me as you should; you 
played with me when one should play with a child; you punished 
when it was necessary to punish a child; you did not talk ill of my 
father to me, as other women do; and you did not spread bad news 
about me outside. Whenever I did a little thing for you, you always 
appreciated it, and you always talked well about me to all the people 
(around). You never did let me fall into disgrace before my peers; you 
did not disclose my secret before friends, and you never turned a deaf 
ear to my request for something from you. You did not starve my 
father; you did not disclose his secret before a visitor; you did not talk 
(ill) about my father in your mother's house and thereby bring shame 
upon him in his in-law's house; I never heard any insultive 
language from you to my father at any time, and you never did (even)
79

once curse my father; and you were not like ill-headed women who 
proudly say that their husbands have no power (nor authority) to do 
anything to them — those who act with impunity. You, my mother, 
just as God did not forsake you in the world, in the same way. He does 
not forsake you in heaven as well. When fire dies, it covers its face 
with ashes; when a banana dies it replaces itself with posterity; I shall 
make a good posterity for you, and as the moon shines around the 
earth, so will I spread your name around on earth. I shall not forget 
your advice. I shall follow the path which you and my father have 
paved for me. Your love for each other shall be my good example, 
and I want you to know certainly, that it is easier for my mouth to 
forget food, for my hand to forget the morsel than for me to forget 
what you have done for me. Good bye, my mother; it is compulsory 
for us to part today, because you are no more in the midst of the living; 
you are among those in heaven. Greet my father for me, Mr. 
Akowediran, and do not forget me, and entreat the Creator for me to 
grant me success on my way. Good bye my mother; go into the grave, 
and continue to rest from the troubles of this world, from the 
afflictions of the children of men; we shall see each other face to face.
"This was the way I spoke to my mother, and as I was talking those 
strange creatures began to depart one by one. When I looked at my 
mother's face, she began to cry, and the water that was coming out of 
her eyes was like big drops of blood. My mother cried for (her) 
child. My head swelled also, and my mind was not in this world 
any more, for since the day she died, I had known that there was no 
sympathetic love like (one's) mother's, and only few people could be 
like (one's) father.
'Therefore, when my mother was about to leave, I rushed towards 
her to grip her, but I simply held the air; (she had disappeared); I did 
so the second time, and my effort proved to be nothing. I did so the 
third time yet I could not get hold of her. I bellowed in a melancholic 
tone. Please, my mother, take me along; please, my mother, take me 
along, etc., etc. She left one garment and a beautiful pair of pants for 
me, and I put them on. I folded my Wet clothes and put them in a bag.
This is my advice to the children of men: that everybody should 
take care of his parents; only few can act like mother and father 
towards one, and when the parents have turned their back (and have 
parted this life), one is left alone —with God. There, while our parents 
are still living, let us take care of them so that they may live long 
(to old age) and straight for (our benefit). When we pound yams, and 
turn (or make) when we are celebrating the life that the
deceased had lived, we are only wasting (our) money: he who has 
passed away has passed away. Let us spend money when money can 
help to save their lives. The money which is spent in burial 
ceremony cannot bring the dead one back to life. If we have spent a 
80

little like gentlemen, that should be enough. Too much spending 
makes a fool out of a person; it keeps us in the category of stupidity 
which is the father of baboons.
"After my mother's departure, I picked up my cake, and I got out 
of the confines of that rock. When I came out, I saw a man who wore 
white clothes, the one whom I saw before I entered the hole of the rock. 
He greeted me well, and he told me that his boss wanted to see me, 
and when I asked what the name of the boss was, he said when I got 
to him he would tell me his name (by himself), so I followed him.
"We walked in the forest. When we arrived at a big and beautiful 
yard which was very beautiful indeed, the man opened the gate to the 
yard and we entered; I saw a very big path which went straight ahead 
through one big house. This was the path we followed until we got to 
the big house; When I looked round, I saw that the house was on the 
rock, and that all its walls were rock (walls). This man opened the door 
and got in, and I also followed him. When I got into the inner part of 
the house, I was afraid to step on the floor, because it was too beautiful; 
it was glittering, but I followed the man as he went. It was not until I 
got into the house that I knew that it was a multi-storey building. After 
we had walked for about eighteen steps, we came to the stairway to 
the upper storey, and the man began to climb until he got to the top 
there, so I climbed along with him, too. When we got up, he turned to 
the left, and I turned there too; when we got to the top floor, he turned 
to the right again, so I turned along with him, and when we had 
walked for about six steps after this, he turned to the right again, and 
so did I too. After this then, I saw one small ladder; when he climbed 
that (ladder), I climbed with him, and when we got to the top, I found 
myself on a very flat roof which was built completely with stone. I 
saw a huge man whose head was bald and whose beard was bushy 
enough that it covered half of the rock; he was smoking a big pipe. 
The man soared me, to tell the truth. So I bowed (before him) 
immediately without having thought about what to do before. 
Whether I liked it or not, I began to bow (for him) just to avoid trouble.
"After this, the man told me to get up, and he opened his mouth 
and began to say, 'Get up you, son of man; I am the father with bushy 
beard who lives on the peak of the rock. It has been a long time since 
I have been here. It is more than three thousand years. The place where 
I am here is the end of the universe, and the wall which surrounds me 
is the dividing line between me and those who are in heaven. Right 
here in my compound, most of the people in heaven come, and we 
play with one another, and after you have finished eating, I shall take 
you to the house of the important gnome, whose name is Death, for 
he has a house in heaven as well as over there, in the boundary 
between heaven and earth. After we have greeted that gnome, I shall 
take you to his wife, because the woman lives separately, the gnome 
whose name is Arun, a down-hearted woman. She is my relative
81






from my mother's side. The woman's father is very wealthy, and it 
was right from childhood that Arun has been spoilt through too much 
indulgence. Since nobody wanted to marry her among the children of 
men, it was one gnome that married her and took her to heaven. She 
is a hypocritical woman, and the creatures in heaven began to turn 
against each other. At last there was an outburst of war in heaven: 
those who loved the woman started an uproar to the extent that the 
matter came to the hearing of God the (heavenly) King. When Arun 
began to narrate the matter before her creator, she spoke 
unbecomingly from her mouth, and this was why God drove her out 
of heaven. After this, she discovered her husband, (and) Arun 
became Satan's wife for forty-four whole years — Satan who was the 
king of the city of hell. But on the fifth month, the eleventh day, in the
forty-fourth year, she ran away from hell because the smoke from the 
fire of hell was too much for her, she said. It was thus that Death got 
permission from God to allow him to marry the woman, so that she 
would be his help-mate in his work."'
'Therefore, you son of man, after you have eaten, there will be a big 
celebration; be ready and tighten your belt because your
eyes are about to see something. I salute you very much; welcome; I 
salute you for the journey you've made; I salute you (for your 
endurance of) the tribulations in the world; I salute you for your 
wandering in the wilderness; I congratulate you on your (days of 
plenty) of food to eat; and salute you for your endurance in the days 
(you had nothing) to eat! How are your people? Is your wife in good 
health? I salute you for all your troubles in Igbo Olodumare, the abode 
of all the strange creatures in the world. Certainly you must have come 
across all kinds of troubles (on your way); the sun must have scourged 
you at noon, and the moon must have served as your lamp in the 
night;above all these, I say to you, you son of man, 
perseverance is the best measure of your sacrifice. If you persevere, 
the rest of the matter is insignificant; at long last, you will come to gain 
the most important thing on earth; that means that one should spend 
it for others to the extent that when one closes one's eyes, the wise 
ones would say of one, "That man had done all he could (to help 
others)."
"Thus he had spoken, and these words penetrated into my heart, 
and when I began to respond, I took a deep breath, cleared my throat, 
so that I would not have any impediment in my throat. After this, I 
answered and I said:
"My dear Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, if you reached down 
within me, you would have realized how happy I am for your speech 
which is sweeter than European salt in my stomach. I am very glad 
that I came to know you today, and the words which you have spoken 
are at the very bottom of my stomach. I am surprised to hear that you 
are so close to heaven, and that it is only a wall that separates your 
82






house from heaven. Any time that I am with you, I shall not take my 
sacrifice beyond the crossroads; I shall not go beyond your wall, 
because I do not want to go to heaven suddenly on a sweltering noon 
time. And about the food which you have spoken, I thank you very 
much for your hospitality. (But) I am not hungry now; after we have 
rested a little, I shall eat. Concerning your question about Igbo 
Olodumare, I cannot lie to you; my eyes really saw something. The 
wind blew for so long that I was almost sick, and the sun scourged me 
to the extent that my body was as hot as a blacksmith fire. About my 
wife, I can tell you that my wife is doing well; about my people, I can 
say that they are in (perfect) health though it has been a long time since 
I had left these people; still whatever prayer the son of man for 
himself is what God accepts for him; one's mind is one's priest.
"But you, my friend, I am amazed to hear the names of your 
neighbours, and I hope that whenever I have the chance, I shall go to 
meet them; I do not think that I can go to see them today, because it 
is getting dark, and I think  that you and I should enjoy each other 
today and tomorrow, we shall go to greet your neighbours. 
Olowo-aiye is my name, and my father is the one whose name is 
Akowediran. Today is a remarkable day, when a man meets a man — 
the day that I get to meet you — you Mr. Old fellow, Baba- 
Onirungbon yeuke I am very glad-who lives on the peak of the rock.' 
"When I finished my speech, both of us got ready to come 
downstairs; but when I said, Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, let me help 
you pick up some of your beard (from the floor).' He answered me 
and he said, 'My dear Olowo-aiye, face your own problems, take your 
eyes off my beard.' When the man had thus spoken, I never spoke 
about someone else's beard anymore; I left him who had his beard to 
take his beard along with him.
"We played (around) until dusk that day; I was also very happy at 
that time because, in the first place, it had been a long time since I had 
had someone to talk to, with whom I could go in and out; in the second 
place, it had been long since I had had decent clothes to wear, and 
since I had been with Baba-Onirungbon, I had put on the garment and 
the pant which my mother brought for me, and the clothes fitted me 
very well, since they were sewn by the artists from heaven; so I began 
to bluff at Baba-Onirungbon's place: I was walking around in a stately 
fashion.


The Second Day at Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's Place, the One who 
Lives on the Peak of the Rock

"When it was dawn the following day, after we had eaten, 
Baba-Onirungbon reminded me about the friends whom he said we 
should go and greet, and he also suggested that we should go to 
Death's house first. So, we got ourselves ready, and we began to go.
"The first thing that surprised me was the fact that the path to 
Death's house was soaked with blood; the shrubs by the way side 
were soaked with blood as well; still Baba-Onirungbon was stepping 
along in the blood without giving it a thought, and his beard began 
to make me laugh as it was dragging on the ground along in the blood. ' 
Nothing (actually) frightened me anymore at that time, for he who 
has got out of the midst of men, and has headed on to the path that 
leads to Igbo Olodumare, and on his reaching there, begins to search 
around for Death, that one has fettered his own feet and has tied 
chains around his own waist; he has squeezed some drops of pepper 
juice into his own eyes, and he is looking around for disaster. Thus 
Baba-Onirungbon kept going, and I, who did not have a beard, also 
followed him along.
"After a while, we came upon Death's house; we were looking at 
the house afar off and when I came closer, I saw seven heaps which 
were tall: they went far into the sky, and they were filled with bones. 
The first heap was filled with human bones, the second filled with 
animals' bones, the third one was (for) snakes, the fourth was (for) 
fish, the fifth one was for birds, the sixth was for ants, and the seventh 
(one) was for flies, but this seventh heap had no bones like the ones 
before that: it had thread-like veins, which were the things that stood 
as bones.
"When we walked a little closer to the house. Death came out of 
the house, for he was coming to meet us. He walked naked; and he 
held a cudgel in his left hand and he held a human skull in his right 
84
hand, for he is a vicious creature. He drank water from a human skull.
As the mysterious creature came out of his house, Baba-Onirungbon 
turned his face to me and said, "See, that's the important creature 
coming right here. Death, whose house is between the earth and the 
heaven." Death is a vicious creature, and he did not have any flesh 
on, he was just bare bones. His eyes were as big as a plate of food, like 
the moon, and were as red as fire and were rolling like a big fruit on 
a tree, dangling and being blown here and there by the wind. The (set 
of) teeth in his mouth were like a lion's; they were red indeed, for 
Death did not enjoy yam, and he did not enjoy banana; he did not 
enjoy okra nor did he enjoy spinach; he enjoyed meat more than 
anything else.
"Death was coming toward us, and Baba-Onirungbon and I were 
going to meet him (as well). We (all) met, he greeted Baba- 
Onirungbon, but he did not greet me. After this, he turned and headed 
towards his house, and we also followed him, and he and Baba- 
Onirungbon were conversing as they were going, but they never 
talked to me. When we got to his house, I was about to sit down, but 
Baba-Onirungbon made a sign with his face and told me not to do 
that. But what surprised me in the house were two things: the first 
thing was the fact that by the side of the house on the right hand side, 
all the names of the diseases that could kill people were (written), 
including the ones that were so insignificant in one's eyes, and the
ones that were very frightening — all of their names were complete 
on the wall. When I looked below those names, I saw these words 
which were in bold letters; 'the filth of the body, the filth of clothes, 
the filth of food, the filth of the air, the filth of mat, constipation, and 
carelessness at the beginning of sickness — these are the things that 
take most children of men out of the world in the morning time and 
the noon day of their lives.'
"The second thing which surprised me was that I met seven people 
in the house, and I marvelled very much at the condition in which I 
saw them.
"The first one sat on a beautiful chair; he wore a velvet garment and 
velvet pants, and he wore a velvet cap which looked like a crown and 
the pair of shoes on his feet were like gold; his garment and pants were 
very beautiful indeed. The man was like a king, and I was surprised to 
see such a handsome one in the house of such an ugly gnome.
"The second one sat down when he got in there, but after that, he 
got up, and after that also, he began to walk; after that he sat down 
again. He was restless: he looked like a person who was afraid of a 
(very) dreadful thing. I finally observed that there was a little booklet 
on his chest and this was what was written in the book: 'an automobile 
does not have relatives, a train does not have a wife, and a motorcycle 
does not favour anyone; he who underrates steel will be run over 
by the steel.
85

'The third one was standing. He had some new trousers on and a 
new garment, but he had on an old man's cap; the cap was horrible:
it looked like an ancient cap. There was a paper on the man's chest, 
and this was what was written on the paper: 'On the day that the 
Creator judges the creature,you will be set free, and your great
grandfather shall be punished.'
'The fourth was a woman; she, slept on a mat and was rolling 
around on the floor as if she was having a great pain. The cloth with 
which she covered herself was a rag, an it was on that rag that this 
inscription was written:''A hypocrite would fall from shame to shame; 
she is not an upward-bound person; she will always be among the 
retrogressive ones forever.'
"The fifth person was on a ladder with many steps. He sat on the 
top-most step when we entered the house. But later, he came to the 
next step down; later he came down a step again, and so on; before 
we left the house, he was sitting on the floor. I observed a little piece 
of paper on his chest, and this was what was written there: 'Just (like 
a child's) play, the slothful person finds himself in the midst of the 
retrogressive ones; like (a child's play), he who is slothful finds himself 
in the vault of heaven.'
'The sixth one sat on a beautiful chair and covered himself with a 
cloth. His face was shining, and his body was (generally) cool; Are 
teeth in his mouth were very white, and his soul was (generally) 
relaxed, and the cloth which he used to cover himself was very 
beautiful, and he himself was very handsome indeed. He was more 
relaxed than Death, and he looked like a master of the house. This 
inscription was written on his chest: 'The mind of the righteous is at 
rest like the heart of him who had done no ill to his neighbours and 
had kept nothing secret in anybody's hand; the heart of the righteous 
is immaculately white, and his body is as cool as the shrub by water, 
and the righteous one stands firm like a huge mountain.'
"The seventh one was in a very precarious situation indeed. We 
met him in a kind of net made with steel; it looked like a fisherman's 
net. It had four sides; it stood upright, and it was like a house for the 
man. When we got there, a fire began to burn where this man was; it
was burning him, and the man began to scream at intervals, and he 
was groaning; he was hissing, and his whole surrounding made 
Death's house to be very frightening. After this man's shouting, and 
the fire was out, I saw a hand which held a whip, but I did not see the ’ 
owner of this hand, and the hand began to whip this man (right) in 
the confinement. After a while, the whip wore out, and I saw a hand 
again which held an axe and was chasing this man around in the net 
and was stabbing him; I was scared when I saw his wounds and a pool 
of blood, and I also saw (his) body-bones with my eyes. After this, this 
axe stopped. And I saw a hand again with ground pepper, and it took 
the pepper and rubbed it on the man's wounds, and the man started 
86

running around again. I was so panicked to the extent that I almost 
ran out. Later, I suddenly saw hot water raining on this man from 
above, and his skin began to peel away very badly. When this was 
stopped, a chain came from above and chained him up. It was in this 
(condition) that we left him when we moved away from this 
shameless creature, Death, who lives mid-way between the earth and 
the heaven.
'Going on with my story, a little while after we had been in Death's 
house, Baba-Onirungbon introduced me to him, he said, "You my 
dear friend, Death, whose house is mid-way between the earth and 
the heaven, without any doubt, you must have noted the one who is 
following me; to tell the truth, you must have been interested in 
knowing the type of person he is—it is true: the man you are looking 
behind me, is a friend of mine, and he is one of the human beings too. 
He is Olowo-aiye, who has come to Igbo Olodumare to hunt. It was 
just yesterday that he arrived at my place, and since he has been with 
me, I have observed that he is a good person indeed. If we have to talk 
about his wholesomeness, we would not only say that two hundred 
faces know him, but we would have to say three thousands faces know 
him. He is the one we should have named Olowo-aiye, a man whom 
one thousand faces know. In order that I may not drag my point out 
too long like the endless earth and like an endless mat, I am glad to 
tell you that since the time that the man arrived at my place, we have 
been playing, and enjoying each other, and since you, my friend, are 
my neighbour who has been taking care of me before his arrival, I 
deem it fit, as it behoves me, that he and I should come (to see you) so 
that,the three of us should (meet) and see one another face to face. 
Therefore, Olowo-aiye is an important person, and you too are an 
important gnome as well; (both) of you are not among the kind of 
friends who should be ignored; may God not ignore anyone of us. 
I greet you — it's been such a long long time since we have seen each 
other that I hope you are keeping things on the right track; I am also 
getting on with my life as deemed by my Creator, I, your one and only 
important friend, Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, who lives on the peak of 
the rock.'
"Thus did Baba-Onirungbon speak about me, and as he was saying 
these things, I too had forgotten that it was in Death's house that we 
were standing; I also stood like an important person; I placed my 
hands on my hip, as an important person should do before (another) 
important person; I stood as a powerful one should stand before 
(another) powerful one. As he was talking, I was also nodding my 
head as a sign to show that I was enjoying the speech from my friend's 
mouth, for he who puts one on the throne expects one to behave like 
a dignified person; he who puts a sanyan garment on one expects
that one to behave like an important person; as my friend was saying 
good things about me, I was also speaking in a gentle and low voice
87

in his ear saying, "Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, thanks, "yes; Baba- 
Onirungbon-yeuke, thanks, etc., etc."
When the man ended his speech, instead of Death giving a short 
answer, he gave a very long answer; The voice of the creature was 
terrifying indeed for when I first heard it, it sounded like a great 
thunder from the sky, and his throat was vibrating as if a great rain 
was about to fall. Death said:
'I am Death, I am the important one who is the messenger of God,, 
the axe of God the (heavenly) King, who cuts people down and 
uproots the roots of all the great ones, who takes away father from the 
one who had a father, who takes a mother away from the one who has 
a mother; I have taken a child from the one who had a child; I have
taken people away from the one who had people; I have taken a 
husband away from the one who had a husband; I have taken a wife 
away from the one who had a wife; I have separated lovers from each 
other; I have taken away friends from friends — one from the other. 
I have brought down the loads of a famous one; I have brought a 
change in the life of the wealthy one; I have eliminated the face of the 
sophisticated one; the cock had crowed behind the back of the 
powerful one; I have taken the beautiful one away from the earth; I 
have made the wise ones to become inhabitants of coffins; I have 
closed the eyes of important personalities, including the young 
healthy man, the elderly ones, male and females, black and white, the 
red ones — they have all fallen before me. She who had been tying a 
head-band on her head before an assembly of people has been 
reduced to a person who cannot talk before an assembly of people 
anymore, and within the honour which God the (heavenly) King had 
given me, I brought tears into the eyes of the children of men; I have 
made them become those who run around (helter skelter); I have 
made them roll on the ground; I have made them hang their heads, 
and hiss, cry, and sigh; I, the only one. Death, am indeed an important 
and a great gnome whose house is mid-way between the earth and 
the heaven.
"You son of man, I thank you today for coming to greet me in my 
house, and I want to send you with a message for the children of the. 
world; today is the sixteenth day of the eleventh month in the nineteen 
hundred and forty-third year after the death of our Lord, that the 
children of men should (please forgive me for asking) reduce my work 
a little bit by taking care of themselves.
"These you have seen in my house are given to me by God (the 
heavenly) King. One of them does not live in my house, but he only 
came to visit me today, for heaven is his home; but the remaining six 
are mine, and God (the heavenly) King had ordered me that I should 
make them as examples for the children of the world, who come 
within my domain.'Listen and hear their story; hear what made them 
leave the world and become pilgrims in heaven:
88

'The first one was old before he left the world. He never behaved 
viciously; he never lied; he never slandered his neighbour; he never 
conspired against anyone, he never went to an Ifa priest in order to 
destroy his neighbour's life; he never committed perjury with 
impunity — in disregarding God's judgement — he was never lazy,, 
neither did he disrespect the elders, and he did not behave viciously 
at any time. Because of these things, when he became ninety years of 
age, God called him out of the sorrow of the world, so he would come 
to enjoy (eternal bliss) in heaven. It is only today that he came to greet 
me, as I had told you before, and he will go back to heaven very 
shortly.
"The second one left the world before the time that God had given 
him was up: he had eyes, but he did not see; he had wisdom, but he 
did not use it; and he destroyed his own life through (his own) 
stupidity. When he was bluffing, he would not get off the road for 
automobiles; he would not yield to the motorcycles — so that the 
people would not make fun of him he would walk on the railroad, 
and stand in the way of the lumber trucks; he would play with 
poisonous snakes, and he was never careful with scorpions; he was 
walking around in the middle of the night; he was goihg about in the 
midst of a strong wind; even when he could not swim, he was still 
playing in the deep water; he used to eat all kinds of bad foods in 
people's houses. He used to behave sluggishly on earth, and he who 
does such things is simply tempting God the (heavenly) King. He 
is making fun of God — he is preparing for (his) day of destruction. 
Because of this, it happened one day when the man did not look where 
he was going (in front of him), one big automobile ran over him; he 
fell down, and his heart did not beat anymore, and I have been ordered 
by God that he whose heart ceases to beat I should bring before Him. 
Thus the man closed his eyes and bade the world goodbye.
"The third one was a gentle person, but his great grandfather was 
more vicious than a poison, and the Creator had promised to visit the 
father's sin upon the children until the third and fourth generations, 
for he who behaves according to his (God's) will, that fellow's son will 
be rewarded in the future. So, when God remembered the man's great 
grandfather's sin, he sent me to go and bring him.
"The fourth one was a beautiful woman in the world, but she was 
a hypocrite; when she was a maiden, she was envious of her peers; 
she was causing a feud among two friends. Seven men proposed to 
marry her, and she agreed to marry all seven of them, and after all 
was said and done, she did not marry any one of them. At the end of 
the matter, one of these men viciously dealt with her (in vengeance): 
he used a deadly medicine against her, and the lady's blood ceased 
to flow, and when her heart did not beat anymore, I went to do the 
job given to me by God: I took her soul (out of her body), and there 
was a great sorrow in her home.
89

"The fifth one destroyed his own life because of carelessiess. He 
only stumbled (on a stone) with his toe, but he did not care to take 
care of the toe, so it developed into a big sore, and it did not heal on 
time: it was infected by a bad germ. After the sore had healed, the 
germ sat (tightly) in his body, and made his body its home. At long 
last, all kinds of diseases began to afflict this man; one disease began 
to cause the other, but all of them were started by just the one germ 
of the other day. At long last, various germs went into the crown of 
the head of the man, and his head over-turned; he began to go 
around naked from one town to the other; his hair was bushy and was 
as red as the shrub by the dusty highway; he was sleeping in the dust 
outside, and he was eating leftovers around people's homes. Children 
were throwing rocks at him as he was walking along. It was because 
of all these things that he became sick; after a long while, the sickness 
got to the point that his heart never beat again — I also went there to 
take him to my Creator.
"The sixth one was a well-behaved person among the children 
of men, but if he had stayed longer in the world, he would have 
suffered many things, because he would have been greatly sick, and 
there would not have been any physician who would have been able 
to cure him; and this sickness would have quickly killed him; it would 
have afflicted him for a long time before I could go to take him. If this 
sickness did not come upon this man, there would have been a great 
fight in which nation would have risen against nation, and one 
government against the other government, and this man would have 
been the cause of the fight, and his name would have been spoiled 
from one generation to the other. It was because of these things that 
God had ordered me to come and take him and bring him before Him.
"The seventh person was a man without a purpose. He was 
never among the mediators in the world; he was a slanderer. He 
ascended to a high position through (his) hypocrisy. After he had 
ascended to a high position, he forbade other people's hands-to reach 
the top, and such a thing was abominable before God; it was also an  
abomination before the creatures in heaven for the one who had 
ascended to the top to be a stumbling block to those who are coming 
behind, and this man forgot the people in the world, and he forgot 
those in heaven and again, he had forgotten God (the heavenly) King. 
He was a person of bad behaviour; there were bad attitudes in his 
hands; there was a habit of greed in his bosom, and he was a child 
of darkness, too. This man was filled with bribery, and he was the
head of the prevaricators; he was the ring-leader of those who sneak 
around in the middle of the night. He had spoiled people's job with 
his mouth, and he had covered other people's good job with a large 
potsherd, so that the people of the world might not see their good 
deeds, and he always looked for secret places in order to ensnare his 
neighbours, and he used to enlarge their little mistakes before the 
90

children of the world. He made the world to turn upside-down, he 
enthroned the liar and brought down the righteous because he 
(himself) is a lowly person, and he would never cope with the people 
at the top forever. When this man was in the world, the Creator's 
language was not apprehended by the children of men, for God gave 
him money; God gave him children; God gave him very many 
treasures in the world. And those things would not last in his hands, 
(but they were given to him) so that this fall would be great indeed. 
When he reached the peak of his fame, God brought him down, and 
he became a retrogressive person; sorrow came over him, he was 
downhearted, and his name was so bad in the world to the extent that 
people eschewed giving that same name to their children. One day, 
my Creator told me to go and bring him, so that the children of the 
world would know that there was not (such a thing) as 
unrighteousness in the good hands of God, no one would escape 
the reward of his hand work, be it here on earth or in heaven. Behold, 
you have seen how the man is being punished in my house, do not 
think that we are being wicked to him, because when this man was in 
the world and was in a high position and ordered that many people 
should be beheaded, and many should be wounded, and he inflicted
vicious punishment upon a host of people without any reason, 
remember that God loved the children of the world very much that 
he gave all things in the world — as much as the world is filled with 
various things — he endowed the children of the world with those 
things. This man whom you are looking at had inflicted punishment 
upon the people whom God loved with unspeakable love. Whatever 
anyone sows, the same shall grow for him (to reap).
'I do not want to say very much now; you son of man, I welcome 
you and I salute my friend for his hospitality; my very dear Mr. 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, who lives on the peak of therock.'
"Thus did the great gnome speak to us, Death, the creature who 
never favoured anyone, who never thought, 'this man is a noble man, 
let me leave him,' whose house was midway between the earth and 
the heaven.
"Before he finished his speech, I had relaxed, and I had decided to 
say good things to him so that I would be able to get out of there (alive). . 
I answered, and I said:
"You great gnome. Death, whose house is midway between the
earth and the heaven, I thank you. Authority has been given to you 
over all things in the world, over all living things. You have been given 
authority over the king and the royal dynasty, over the wealthy and 
the poor, over the physician and the herbalists. You have power over 
the beasts in the forest and over the snake which crawls upon its belly, 
the lion and the wild boar, the hyena and the elephant, the python and 
all (other) snakes. You have power over the birds which fly in the air 
and over the fish in the ocean, over the shrub on the ground and over
91

the little ants. The warriors who have passed away, you were the one 
who took them away; those who spoke and their speech became 
effective, you have taken away from the earth. The important people 
in the party and the big people in the council, you have taken away, 
and I am happy today to have known a big creature like you. I thank 
you for all the words you have spoken, and I shall deliver your 
message to the children of the world; I shall not be repetitious (in 
doing so, I shall deliver all you have spoken to them), therefore, I 
want you fo allow me to leave today, I shall come back to see you 
tomorrow; I was doing something which I left in order to come to see
you face to face; therefore, good bye for now; I am going home to my 
friend — three men in one — Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke who lives on 
the-peak of the rock.
"When I finished my speech. Death and I greeted each other ve 
did not shake hands, neither did one prostrate for one other; instead 
of those things, we nodded to each other, and then bade each other 
good bye and prayed that God might bring us together in peace 
tomorrow.
"Thus my friend and I left the house of the vicious spirit, and we 
went on our way; when we were on our way back, I asked Baba- 
Onirungbon-yeuke why he forbade me, by his conspicuous blinking 
of his eyes, to neither shake hand with Death, nor prostrate for the 
gnome, and that I should be careful while I was on his mat; he 
answered me and he said, 'He who shakes hands with Death, that 
fellow's own (life) is finished; he who prostrates for him that fellow's 
own (life) is lost, and he who sits on his mat; that fellow's own (life) 
would ascend to the vault of heaVen.' 
"When Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke told me this, the matter mystified 
me, and I was afraid even more — all the evil things in the creature's 
house began to throb gently below my navel. I who had a wife, and 
with whom I had not lived for long, I (certainly) did not want to end 
my life in the world; furthermore, I, who had just heard that I had a
new baby and had not seen the baby with my eyes, would not want 
my life to be lost; I who had been suffering around in the world, who 
had never enjoyed the world, would not want to be ready to go to the 
vault of heaven. I told my friend: 
"You my friend if you find my feet in this your neighbour's house 
again, you can say that it was not my father who begat me.
"Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke also answered me and he said, "No 
matter how much you want to avoid him, I think you have to go there 
tomorrow, because you have promised him, and it thus behoves you 
to fulfill your promise.'
"He hardly finished his speech when I also answered him; I said, 
'I will not fulfill my promises.'
"After I had fous spoken, Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke laughed; he 
said, "My friend, I thought you were the one who was promising 
92

before the man now, and your mouth was speaking so firmly?"
"I also answered, and I said. Yes, what if my mouth was speaking 
so firmly? Do you think that one severs a seed from a palm-nut with 
a gentle face? You (yourself) saw the man's face like a fire; you saw 
his nails like those of a leopard, and you were still asking me to speak 
well; don't you know that whether or not I wanted to, I had to say 
good things before the man?"
"Baba-Onirungbon answered again and said, "Well, that is not 
proper; we should always promise and we should (try) to fulfil our 
promises; we ought to go to the man's house tomorrow."
"After he had thus spoken I shouted in a very loud voice; I said, 
"Reach whose house? Baba-Onirungbon, reach whose house?"
"He also answered again, he said, "Reach who else's house? What 
about Death's house!"
"I then became angry: I said, "It is your head that would reach 
Death's house; it is your chest that would reach-Death's house; you 
bushy-bearded fellow."
"After I had thus spoken, Baba-Onirungbon also answered me, and 
he said, "My beard may be bushy or not bushy; we must reach the 
man's house tomorrow. Whether you like it or not, I shall drag you 
there; even if I have to carry you, I will carry you."
"When the man had thus spoken, I said, "Baba-Onirungbon, I don't 
like that! Look at his beard as it is dragging vigorously on the ground."
"But instead of his being angry, he also answered me, he said, "I 
thought you were resting your arms on your hip at that time? Let me 
tell you, I have now decided within myself that I am going to throw 
one big party to rejoice because of you and invite the gnomes of Igbo 
Olodumare to the party; I also have it in mind to make Death the 
chairman, and name Disease as his assistant, and make you the guest 
of honour in their midst."
"After he had thus spoken, I was afraid, and I said, 'I have now 
been pressed against the wall; I have taken my sacrifice beyond the 
mosques; I had eaten sari with pork; I have roasted a green plantain
for a white man to eat; I have told Hausa man to stop eating kolanut, 
I have told a Yoruba fellow not to eat eko. This matter exasperated
me to the extent that I stopped talking to Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke 
until we got home.
"When we got home, I decided to apologize to him. I said that I 
could not go back to Death's house anymore. After this, Baba- 
Onifungbon replied to me and his reply was full of very much 
wisdom. He answered and said.
"Olowo-aiye, there is something that I want to tell you today; I 
want you to take note of something and learn to be wise by it. If you 
see a person who promises and fails to fulfil it, I want you to know 
that person is undependable. When a gentleman speaks, people 
should be able to find his words to be so, a gentleman's promise
93






is like a chain with which he has bound himself; without his fulfilling 
his promise the chain remains bound. A frivolbus person counts a 
promise as a joke; if he says this today, he would say that tomorrow, 
and the whole world would count his words to be weightless, to the 
extent that there is nothing he says that the children of the world 
would not count as a mere levity. Olowo-aiye, you are a gentleman; 
no matter how bad the matter might be, I want you to act according 
to your promise. This is what I can do; I shall not invite Death to come 
and eat at the banquet because of you anymore, and when we get to 
the house of the gnome, we will not go in; instead of that, we will stay 
outside and tell him that we are just going out, and we decided to visit 
him, according to our promise to him.
"When the man finished this speech, I revised my thought, for I 
had seen that the matter had already been decided, I had to be
prepared for the next day; whether I liked it or not, I had to head 
towards the path that led to Death's house — he whose house was 
mid-way between the earth and the heaven."
94

6
The Third Day at Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's Place

"I did not sleep (a wink) till the following day. The only one time that 
I closed my eyes, I began to dream a bad dream. I saw a bad fairy in 
my dream; he was chasing me around. As the fairy was chasing me 
along, I met one snake on the way, and his teeth were like the teeth of 
a lion; as I was running away from that, I saw an animal which was 
not fat: it looked like a sick animal whose nails were very long; this 
one also terrified me; after that, I woke up. When I woke up, I was 
panting like one who was running a race, and my heart was beating 
very loudly like an aeroplane. Ha! My eyes saw something in Igbo 
Olodumare — my eyes saw something (indeed).
After I had eaten breakfast with Baba-Onirungbon this second 
day, I told him to let us go to (Mr.) Death's house before we set our 
hands on anything that we planned to do (on that day), he too agreed 
with me. When we got there, we did not find the fairy at home, but 
we left a message for him so that whenever he returned, they should 
give our message to him. Thus I came back joyfully to my friend's 
house, Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, who was living on the hillock of the 
rock.
"This friend of mine was very hospitable to me; he did not let me 
touch the cake which my mother brought for me from the dome of 
heaven.
"When we came back, and after we had finished eating the second 
time, Baba-Onirungbon took me up to his upper storey, and when we 
got there, he took a seat, and I took a seat; both of us were facing each 
other; he then told me that the important thing that we were to do was 
the matter he was going to discuss with me. After he had told me this, 
I was also happy; I adjusted my seat very well, I told my new friend 
that I was listening, and that he should go on with his speech. Thus 
the man started to speak, and he said:
'Without any doubt, you must have been surprised by suddenly 
meeting me in this forest when you came here three days ago. You
95

cannot understand the type of person I am, nor the nature of the 
conditions in which I am, if I do not tell you. I, as you are looking at 
me, am partly human and partly gnomish, why? Because my father 
was human, and he was a hunter too. The time that I am now talking 
about is long, long time ago; but my father was the oldest of all the 
hunters in the world at the time when I was born. My mother was not 
a human being at all, she was a gnome. But my mother was very 
beautiful indeed. As it was the trait of most beautiful women, my 
mother was very proud; the notably important gnomes who were 
interested in her when she was a girl did not get a favourable reception 
from her, until those honourable ones left her, and it became difficult 
for her to find a husband. At long last, my father found her in the
forest, and he married her, as the story goes. My father had heard 
about the fairy, and he began to look for her around. In those days, 
women were wiser than those (women) of today, because they did not 
marry men just because of their bluffing alone, they did not marry 
men just because of their handsomeness alone, but they married men 
if the men were powerful men, if they had a deep love that could not 
fade, if they recognized what was right as right, and what was 
befitting as what was befitting; for if a person recognizes what is right 
as what is right, and what is befitting as what is befitting, we would 
not find the person doing something that does not befit the son of man. 
Therefore, at this time, my mother took my father into the rocks of 
their home, and they tested him. There, my father fought a lion; he 
killed a lion with an axe; my father fought with a leopard; my father 
fought a python, and killed the python with a whip, and he spent 
seven days without food.
"When my father completed this test,the woman then asked him, 
and she said, 'Why do you love me?' And my father answered like a 
wise man, and he said, 'I love you, but I do not understand the reason. 
myself; whenever I see you, I simply love you.' The woman 
answered; and she said, 'I will marry you; you wise man, because the 
most complete love is the love for which one cannot explain the 
reason; if a person loves someone because of his brilliance, if she 
marries him because of his bluffing, if she marries him because of the 
words of his mouth, if she marries him because of the way he walks, 
the love would not amount to anything. Because a day will come, 
when these things might be gone, or you might be tired of them; but 
if you love a person and you cannot tell exactly why you love him, 
your love is a complete love. Therefore, I will marry you; you are going 
to be the father of my home.'
"You, my friend, thus did my father marry my mother, and by the 
time that I was born, my mother, in as much as she was herself a fairy, 
she gently sneaked to the dome of heaven, and she plucked one of the 
fruits of the tree of life, she gave it to me, and I ate it, thus I cannot die
forever. But when God the (heavenly) King learned of this, he ordered 
96

the angels to come and take me after I had lived among the children 
of men for seventy years, and bring me close to the gate of heaven. 
This was why you found me here, where I can hear the cock crowing 
from heaven. I, the only one Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, who lives on 
the hillock of the rock. '
'But you, my friend, ’when I was in the midst of the children of 
men, I saw a lot of their secrets. Let me speak a little bit about one of 
their bad attitudes which they always showed; let us talk about their 
envy.
'"I am telling you, if the world had changed to the extent that a 
sheep became pregnant with a baby goat, and a cat became pregnant 
with a rooster, an envious person will never be happy forever. An 
envious person does not want another person to progress except him; 
an envious person does not want another person to be brilliant, except 
him; an envious person does not have anyone else, except himself; an 
envious person does not want another person to build a house, except 
him; an envious person does not want another person's child to be in 
a high post, except his own child; an envious person does not want 
another person to have a successful child, except his own child; the 
world is replete with people, and we cannot be without those who 
would make progress in those ways, and as they progress, an envious 
person would continue to be downhearted; therefore, an envious 
person can never be happy forever, even if the earth changed and 
became heaven.
"'Listen, let me tell you a short story:
"'One day, when I was among the children of men, there was a man 
near our house; the man was very poor, and he had a wife. This wife 
loved her husband very much. For long as they were in adversity, 
she never left her husband even for a day.
"'At long last; one wealthy man decided to help this poor man. This 
wealthy man had a piece of land which was filled with palm trees. He 
called this man and arranged with him to tap palm wine on these 
palm trees; after tapping the wine, and after selling the wine, the 
proceeds should be divided equally (between both of them). He gave 
this poor man some money which he needed to buy some gourds and 
all wine tapping equipment. This man was happy, and he got ready 
one day, and he went to the farm; he tapped the wine, and he tied 
those gourds around the trunk of the palm trees, with the hope that 
on the next day when he got there, he would find wine in those gourds, 
and he would sell the wine, and he and the wealthy man would share 
the proceeds equally. On the next day, when this man went to check 
the gourds, he found them broken on me ground. This mystified him 
greatly, and it was a very painful experience for him.
"When he returned home, he took the small amount of money 
which he had, and bout other gourds, and he went to tie them 
around the neck of the palm tree, but when he got there again the next
97


day, he found those gourds broken on the ground.
'"This man found another means to get some money with which 
he bought other gourds, and he decided to watch and see what was 
breaking his gourds; thus after he had tapped the wine, he did not go 
home; he climbed to the top of a tree, watching what would happen 
to his gourds. He waited until dusk; still he did not see anything; but 
still he did not go (home).
'"When it was midnight, the man saw something that was coming 
towards these palm trees, and he took a very good look of that thing, 
and saw that from its waist downward, the thing was human, and its 
hands were those of a human too, but the head and all the rest of the 
body were entirely that of antelope.
'"When this strange creature came to those palm trees, he began to 
climb them one by by one, taking the wine on top of them; after he 
had turned the wine from the gourd into the big gourd which he 
brought, he would throw the gourd to the ground, and the gourd 
would break. Thus he was breaking the gourds one by one as he went 
from one to the other. As the strange creature was doing this, this 
man shouted greatly, and when he had shouted, this creature took his 
big gourd of palm wine, and he began to run along. The man was also 
running after him. The moon was like the noon daylight; they ran (all 
night) until dawn, still the man did not turn back, he kept pursuing 
him, and he pursued him until they got to the foot of a mountain; this 
man followed him again, as he finished climbing this mountain to the 
top there, this man foand himself in the midst of all kinds of animals 
in this world; they were in their council.
'"When he arrived there, the strange creature fell to the ground into 
the midst of these animals, and the man stood among them with fear. 
Lion, the king of animals, was greatly annoyed, because it was a great 
grief for them to see a person who is an enemy of animals in the forest 
(right) in their midst. The lion ordered that the man should be killed. 
But after he had given th order, the man begged for permission from 
the hands of those animals  that they should give him a chance to 
say something from his own mouth and they acceded to his 
request.
"This man stooped to pick the story from his being destitute (to 
the point at which) one rich man had mercy on him, and how he and 
the rich man had made an arrangement about palm wine, and how 
he had found the gourds of the palm wine broken several times before 
he decided to find out what was breaking the gourds of palm wine. 
Thus, and how he had found the strange creature, and (how) he had 
to follow him till he came to the animals place.'
'"After this man had finished his speech, the animals were very 
angry at the vicious creature, who was breaking this man's gourds of 
palm wine. Fancy that! It was an antelope. It was the animals who 
were sending him to go and buy palm wine for them during the 
98

meeting; and they always gave him money, saying that he should get 
into the town, and change himself into a human being, and buy the
palm wine; but instead of his doing that, antelope always kept the 
money in his own pocket, and was stealing other people's palm wine 
around on the trunk of the palm tree, and he always told the animals 
that he bought it with money. Because of this, they immediately killed 
the antelope —a thief who was climbing the palm-trees around. These 
animals sympathized with this man, and they thought at length about 
what they could do for him, but they did not know (what to do); so 
they gave him the power to hear the voice of the birds and the
animals whenever they were talking to each other; but they 
commanded the man not to tell anybody that he could understand the 
language of the birds and the animals and that on the day that he 
revealed the secret to the children of men, he would die.
'"Thus the man went back home with this great gift, and was going 
on with the rest of his life, and he did not reveal the secret to anyone.
'"When, on a certain day, as he sat down in his courtyard playing 
in the evening, he heard a hen telling her chicks to be careful and get 
out of a certain place, because if they stayed long there spreading the 
dirt around there, it would not be long when they would find a bag 
of gold coins at the bottom, and that the owner of the house might, by 
so doing, see it. Thus did the hen tell her chicks, without knowing that 
she was talking into the hands of the owner of the house. When she 
had finished her talk, the chicks left the place where they were playing: 
they followed their mother; they were looking for their daily food 
along. After these chickens had left, the man took a hoe, and he took 
an axe, and he took the tools with which a person could dig the
ground, and he began to dig the place along. In a short time, he found 
the bags of money which the chicken had talked about, and he began 
to pack them. Since that day, a good change came to this man, for he 
had become wealthy and his fame had greatiy spread around the 
vicinity.
"'Just as most of the rich people do money always rises and 
covers some people's face like (a tide of) the Atlantic Ocean, and it 
intoxicates others like palm wine. Money makes some people forget 
where they had been; instead of praising the Creator with their 
money, they always kick their feet against the One who made them. 
God is powerful, yet we still can find the intelligent people, who have 
money and also have humility, and still make obeisance before God 
the (heavenly King).
'"When this man became wealthy, he decided to marry woman 
upon woman, but the last wife that he married was not beautiful: 
her two feet were not good; she was lame. He married her, simply 
because she was a princess but this woman's envy was greater than 
that of all the women in the world. The woman had put on envy like 
a gown; she tied jealousy around her loins like a drawer; she wrapped
99

the clothe of greed around her hip, and she put a shawl of covetousness
on top of her dress.
From the time the woman had entered the house, she had not 
wanted the elder wife to have anything to do with the husband 
again; she did not want the husband to talk to her; she did not want 
the husband to play with her; she did not want the husband to do 
anything for the woman anymore, and, this wife was not with the 
husband when the other one (the husband) did not have a cloth worth 
a single kobo!.
'When it was in the night, one day, this man and his elder wife 
were in the room; the wife was outside; as they were in the room, the 
man was hearing the rats, talking to each other; they were scolding 
the man saying that he did not sleep on time, so that they would be 
free to go and eat.
'"As these rats were speaking thus, the man burst into laughter, 
but he hardly finished his laughter, when this vicious wife darted into 
the house, and she began to scream greatly and shouting that it was 
her that this man was making fun of. This man told her that it was not 
her, but she did not listen; she said that the man had to tell her what 
was making him laugh. They fought this fight till day-break. When it 
was dawn, the woman went to her father, and told him this matter. 
She lied against the husband, saying that she heard her name when 
her husband and the elder wife were talking and also that there was 
no doubt that she was the one both of them were scoffing. For this 
reason, she suggested that her father should send for the husband 
and he should ask him for her about the matter they were discussing, 
and also, that if the man could not tell what was causing his laughter, 
it must be assumed that he had underrated the king. For that, the king 
must then kill him.
"'Before a bird picked up a guinea-corn the king sent for this 
man. When he came and told the king that he could not tell what was 
causing his laughter, the king got angry, and he told the man that he 
was going to kill him; the man agreed to the king's proposal. They 
ordered him to go and clear his house, and they named the day of his 
execution. He too went home, and he padded all his belongings 
together, and he gave them to his first wife, who was his elder wife to 
that woman who was the daughter of the king —a traitor; he got ready 
to die. On the day of his death, all the citizens gathered together 
without a single person missing. According to the custom of the town, 
they gave him a chance to speak to the town's people before he died.
'"When this man began to speak, fear gripped the town's people 
very firmly. He spoke about how he was once a poor man, and that 
his poverty was so much that he never had more than one under- 
wear in the world, and that his wife did not have more than one 
drawer, and that the money he used to have on hand at a time never 
exceeded three pence, and he never slept at night, because of much 
100

thinking and his heart was never at rest, and his food was never 
good, and his body was as dried as a stick.
'"And how it was his neighbour alone, who had mercy on him, and 
he began to tap palm wine, and how an antelope was breaking his 
gourds, and he began to pursue it until they got before a host of 
animals. He also told how he presented his case before the animals, 
and how they gave him the power to hear the voices of the animals 
and the birds, and how they had warned him that, on the day that he 
told the secret to another person, he was going to die. He also spoke 
about the conversation of the rats, which he heard, which made him 
laugh, which also made his wife to say that he was scolding her.
"'Immediately the man finished his speech, he fell down and died.
'"You, my friend, after he had died, they took that woman and 
hanged her on the tree.
"This is what the world is like, you, my friend: some people would 
marry death into the house with money, and would say that they 
have married women; some people would marry debt, and they 
would say that they have married wives. Some people would, because 
of greed, lose the love of an important wife. A wife's matter is not a 
jovial matter, for whatever pertains to one's home is no more a trivial 
matter. If a person wants to have a wife, it behoves the fellow to think 
very deeply, and he should entreat God to guide him, because a 
mother is different from a wife, and a father is different from one's 
woman. A woman is a snail shell, and a husband is the snail: wherever 
the snails goes, it goes with the shell. Once marriage is started, 
trouble has started; as wives multiply, the love would continue to 
dwindle, and a host of men are living with (their bitter) enemies, 
whom they call women. Act according to your capacity, you, my 
friend; be sure that your wife loves you before she enters your
house. It is true that you are the one who should first ask her to marry 
you before she responds to you, but be sure that she herself loves you. 
And you should not also behave like the hypocritical man about 
whom the women pray that God should not let them come their way.
"By the same token, there are many envious people in this our 
world, and there is no way in which they cannot show their envy. The 
one who is unhappy about other people's progress is an envious 
person. If a person is in the position of being a head an envious 
person always looks for every means to show that that person is not 
fit for the post, and he would forget that he whom God has exalted, 
nobody can bring him down forever.
"Thus did Baba-Onirungbon speak his words, and when he 
finished those words, I answered, and I said, 'My dear friend, is that 
the end of your speech? Go on with it, I am enjoying it; your words 
are entering my ears, I am enjoying your words, my friend, 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, the man.
"After this, Baba-Onirungbon got up from where he sat, and he
101

pointed to a tree that had very beautiful flowers, he said, 'Look at that 
tree over there, the tree whose leaves are deeply green over there. 
Look at its flowers again; see how beautiful they are also. After that, 
look at the right hand side near the tree, you will see another tree 
which is a little smaller; you will see that both of them resemble each 
other. Observe both of them very well, because I want to say 
something to you about them.
"After he had thus spoken, I also answered; I said, I have seen them, 
they resemble each other; they are like twins among all the trees in 
that vicinity, therefore go on with your talk.
"After I had said this,the man continued his talking, he said, 
Olowo-aiye, those two trees that you have seen were human beings 
before. The older of the two was a boy, the second one was a girl. The 
two of them loved each other very much, and they wanted to marry 
each other, so that they would become husband and wife, but the 
parents of both of them did not want them to marry each other, 
because there was no agreement among those parents. Still this young 
boy and the young girl were like the tongue and the mouth to each 
other, and they used to talk to each other through a hole on the wall. 
If the girl put her ear in the hole on the wall on one side, the boy would 
talk to her from the other side. If the boy put his ear in the mouth of 
the hole in his room, the girl would talk to him from over there. My 
friend, it is I who have told you; there is no way that two lovers can 
exist without having a difficulty between them. Love does not walk 
without stumbling a little, but a complete love always turns a 
mountain to a plain ground; he always walks carelessly in the middle 
of thorns, and he will run fast in the midst of pot-holes and hillocks.
'Thus those two decided to run away from home and go to another 
town, so that they could live together according to the love of their 
heart; but man proposes, but God disposes: man knows today God 
knows tomorrow; He knows day after tomorrow, and He knows the
uncountable thousands of years ahead of us.
"The two children decided to leave home at night in the moonlight, 
and they promised to meet each other by one river bank; who ever 
first got there would wait for the other, and when both of them met 
there, they would run away, so that they would thereby live together, 
and begin to eat pounded-yam with love, and eat oka with love, and 
eat akasu with love.
" In the evening of the appointed day, it was the female that first 
got to this bank of the river, waiting for her lover. But it was not long 
when she had thus been waiting, when she saw a lion coming, and 
when she saw it, she ran away to hide herself in the hole of a rock, but 
one of her clothes fell on the ground, as she was running away. When 
this lion got to where the clothe was, it sniffed it, and turned it with 
its mouth, and the blood awfully stained the clothe. After this, the lion 
drank water, and went into its hole. But this girl did not know when
102
the lion left: she kept sitting there (in the hole).
"'Soon after this, the boy came and he did not see his female lover, 
instead of this, he found his lover's clothe on the ground, awfully 
stained with blood. When he saw this, he thought that his lover had 
died, he burst into bitter weeping, he said;
"'What a pity! What a pity! What a pity! My lover has gone! What 
is the world to me without my lover? My lover has fallen into the 
hands of a vicious beast; a lion has torn her into pieces. Who will be 
like my lover in the world! Who is as beautiful as the child among the 
children of men! Who can do what she did for me! Ha! My lover, my 
lover, my dearest lover. In the day of sorrow, you gave me joy; on the 
day of weeping, you gave the laughter; on the day of anger, you 
comforted me; on the day of fighting, you gave me patience; on the 
day of lowering down, you lifted me up. When the children of the 
world rejected me, you did not reject me; when they were scolding 
me, you did not scold me, when they were conspiring against me, you 
did not conspire against me; it was you that I made as my pride before 
friends; it was you that I made as a provocation before those who 
knew me; it was you about whom I was boasting in the midst of all 
well-known people. As you dealt with me in my presence, so you did 
behind my back also. Wherever you saw my people you honoured 
them; whenever there were visitors, you were always taking care of 
them with joy. I only gave you money whenever I had any. I gave 
you gift only whenever it was within my ability to give you a gift, and 
you had never put my matter down, scolding me behind my back in 
the midst of your playmates; I always found you wherever I left you, 
you had not married me and then begun to whisper to another person 
in the secret afterwards, and I have never caught you in any hypocrisy 
since the day we have been dating each other. You have respected 
me the way you should respect me; you have played with me at the 
right time of playing; you sympathized with me at the time of 
sympathizing; thus you have never told me, even one day, what I 
could do (for you). What remains for me after all these? What remains 
for me then? For you to go and me to remain in the world or what? 
Not me! A tortoise never goes with his shell left behind; wherever the 
snail goes it goes with its shell.
"'Thus did the young man say, and after he had finished his speech, 
he pulled out a cutlass, and he cut himself in the stomach, to the extent 
that his guts spilled out — death had come.
"'As this boy kept silent his lover came out from the hole in 
which she was hiding, no person could tell how great the sorrow was, 
when she saw the corpse of her lover. On the same spot, she fell down, 
and she was downhearted to the extent that she died for nothing.
"The story of their death spread to all parts of the world at that 
time, and God the (heavenly) King turned both of them to those two 
trees which you are looking at there — the trees whose leaves are cool
103

as bananas by the bank of the river, and the flowers on their tops were 
bringing out sweet smell. God has put two creatures from heaven 
under those trees, so that they would be watching the place so that 
nothing would come to harm their bodies.
'"Behold, my friend, when love is hot, it is like the sea water that 
rises up and covers the sand. Love always covers the faces of those 
who love each other. Love is like palm wine from the palm tree with 
which a man has been drunk which begins to intoxicate him, which 
has turned him into a mad man, which makes him unconscious of 
what he is doing. Many women always turn deaf ears to their relatives 
when love boils over, and spills over their faces like hot water which 
boils over and covers the yam flour. It behoves the young boys and 
young girls to open their eyes very well, and beg God the (heavenly) 
King to direct them to the (right) way before they begin to love 
someone. Faces and clothing are the things the young children of 
today focus upon for which they love people: this is a complete act of 
stupidity. A child who does not think deeply before he lets love ride 
him like a horse, when love had pushed him in the pit, his arms and 
feet would fill up the pit to the brim.
"Thus did Baba-Onirungbon teach me an important wisdom after 
he had completed his second story. As I was looking at him when he 
kept silent, I asked him; I said, 'My dear Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, 
I thank you very much, I thank you, and I thank you again, for the
more a person accumulates days over his head, the more wisdom in 
his head would continue to increase. Aren't you going to ask why 
I said that? I have been surprised since you have been talking today, 
as I heard the big words which were in your mouth, and I was noting 
the important words which were in your throat. When I thought a 
little while about these words, I almost wept for children, because they 
are not afraid of the elders anymore: they are wise in their own eyes. 
They are dying like fire, and they are falling sick unawares; still they 
would not think and take note of the words of those of you who are 
elders, so that they would increase (their) wisdom, so that they would 
increase (their) knowledge, so that they would recognise the stump 
which caught the feet of the ones before them, so that they too would 
not fall into a bottomless pit. Thus it is a lie: a partridge that compares 
itself with a hen is playing with death; a child that compares himself 
with adults is pulling trouble's leg (toward himself), for a child's 
stomach is shallow, and the stomach of an adult is deeper than the sea 
water.
Therefore, my great Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, I thank you very 
very much. Go on with your talk; it is very delightful to me; I am not 
tired of it.
After I had said this, he looked at me for a while; he shook his 
head up and down, and he said, You, young child, you are very 
wise. After he had said this, he continued his words again; he said.
104

'"Olowo-aiye, when I think for a while sometimes, when I think 
about the lack of contentment of the children of the world, it always 
seems as if one important person has cursed the children of the world. 
The children of men will never say, 'We have gone far enough where 
we are;' they would say just a little bit more, until the day of their 
death. But when I think about it, on the other hand, I can see, again, 
that if there were no such things, the world would not have been as 
sweet as this. Still, things call for moderation. Let us take the 
Christians for example: a Christian who was in the position of a reader 
in the church, and he left this post to become a clergyman, and (from 
there}, he became a bishop, and yet he was not contented; does that 
person want to become God? Or for a Moslem to become an alhaji 
and (from there), to become a junior Imam, and for him to get out 
of that, and become the head of the Imams, and he still continues to 
tip-toe; does that person want to become the Anabi? The children 
of the world do not always have contentment at all — what a shame! 
Observe many of the rich people — not all of them — but when many 
of them become rich, they find it difficult to eat with their mouth, and 
they would begin to behave like those who have been cursed; they 
would drink gari in the afternoon; they would drink gari in the 
midnight, until their cheeks would be flat, and all their bodies would 
be dried completely,like the meat that my wife cooked in the soup 
last night, whose bones were sounding crunchy in my mouth. Truly, 
it is good for people to struggle to do a big thing and for one to look 
for progress for one's self, because he who stands on one spot like a 
stagnant water is not among the living; that fellow is a dead one 
among them. But he who stretches his hand to that which his hand 
can never reach forever — it is just a tail that such a person needs in 
order to be a complete monkey so that he would be hopping from one 
tree to the other. A Yoruba son, who is not related to the family of a 
king, in whose family no one has ever worn a crown, and to whom 
nobody had told a story of his family in relationship to Odudua, and 
who leaves his home town to go and run for a royal position in the 
town on the other side, saying that he wants to be a king, that one is 
not different from a baboon, except that his body is smoother than that 
of a baboon.
"In the olden days, when the world was not like this, when the 
children of men knew the value of God more than now, God always 
sent a messenger from ‘heaven to come and visit the world; the
messenger used to come every seven years; the messenger was one of 
the creatures in heaven; the people in the world used to call him the 
Representative of God. At whichever time he came, it used to be a big 
time in the world; song used to bump into song; drumming used to 
bump into drumming; dance used to bump into dance and people 
used to have an important party as a token of respect for the one who 
made them. At the time about which we are talking, Satan had not
105

had a root in the world; he used to be a special creature in heaven. But 
when Satan took sacrifice beyond the crossroads, and turned a deaf 
ear to the word of God, the creatures in heaven drove him outside. 
This was the time that Satan had a chance to destroy the lives of men 
— when man began to turn his back against God the (heavenly) King. 
Satan was more vicious than the rest of the creatures, and since he had 
invaded the hearts of those people, they began to enter into sin like 
someone entering a room. They were hissing against God, and they 
were saying that the position in which He put them was not enough, 
and they were saying unfit words to their Creator.
'"After a while, when the Representative of God came to visit them, 
they did not honour him as (they did) before, and when he asked them 
the reason, they told him that the position in which God placed them 
was not enough, and that they were not satisfied with their condition.
'"God loves man: He always treats man like his child. When the 
creature got (back) to heaven and delivered the message that the 
children of the world were not satisfied, God sent him back to go and 
enquire what each of them wanted, so that he would do it for them. 
When the Representative of God got back to the world, he rang a bell 
round the outside saying that everybody should come to meet him so 
that he would ask his question, so that he would go and tell the One 
who sent him. They delayed him for three complete years. They were 
sending him with messages to heaven. Their questions were diverse, 
and they were more than one could count; yet, I shall tell you a few 
of their questions.
'"One of the men who came before the Representative of God asked 
his questions thus and he said "You messenger of the Creator of the 
earto, you messenger of the Creator of heaven, this is my heart's 
desire: I am tired of being in the position of the poor, I am not the only 
one in the world; why is it that my (own case) becomes so difficult? 
Counting the days of want of something to eat, the days of want of 
something to drink, the days of want of something to cover the body; 
my own (destitution) is (simply) too much; please help me tell God 
the (heavenly) King, to have mercy, and put me in a better condition 
than this.'
'The second one who also came to the Representative of God began 
his own speech; he said, 'You messenger of the Creator of the earth, 
you messenger of the Creator of heaven, tell God the (heavenly) King 
for me that he should examine my matter; the one who is my boss at 
work is more vicious than a poisonous snake; he has wickedness (in 
him) as if he were not himself a human being; he always sends me on 
an errand in the middle of the night; he always sends me on an errand 
in the secret; he always sends me on an errand in the open; he had 
never commended me for my work, not even for one day; and he 
always frowns his face from the morning right to the evening. 
Therefore, I beg you, help me tell God the (heavenly) King, that He 
106

should put me under another person, who would take care of me." 
'"Someone came again to the Representative of God, and when he 
started talking, he said, 'You messenger of the Creator of the earth, 
you messenger of the Creator of heaven, help me to tell God that it is 
my wife who has not given me any single satisfaction; it was the wife 
who first drew my face to herself; I never had the intention marry 
her at first. But what about when the time the strong-headed one came 
home? She does not even know how to be fashionable in anyway; she 
is not current with today's world; her clothes are not good enough; 
her steps are not healthy; her foods do not go very well in the throat. 
She cannot talk very much through her mouth; the whole house is 
usually deadly silent. The woman is sickly: I go from the house of one 
priest to other, moreover her people are very poor; they do not 
have anything. My friend who lives close to my house never had half 
a penny before: it was his wife's father that made him to become a 
person he spent a big amount of money for his surety with a white 
man, and when I saw both husband and wife not long ago, they both 
sat and leaned their backs in a saloon car, moving along like royalty. 
Therefore, I beg you, you important messenger, who is the 
Representative of God, tell God (the heavenly) King for me, that He 
should take this wife and give her to some one else, and that He should 
find a wife who would be better for me."
"One educated person came to the Representative of God; this man 
whom we are talking about was a teacher. When he got to the 
Representative of God and began to speak, he said, 'You messenger 
of the Creator of the earth, you messenger of the Creator of the heaven, 
tell God the (heavenly) King for me that I am not contented with this 
work that I am doing at all, because my money is not enough, the 
children do not give me a rest of mind, and I have to write everyday, 
and my head is always very hot indeed. Those with whom I started 
working at the same time are now fat; the back of their necks are now 
big, and their mere knees are even fatter than my waist. Thus, here I 
am, I am as slender as a snake, and I am not fat. I'm just like an earth ­
worm and I am just staggering around. Therefore, I beg you, tell God 
the (heavenly) King for me, that He should look for another job for 
me.'
"Immediately this man finished speaking that which was in his 
mouth, another man dropped in front and fell down before the Repre- ­
sentative of God; he said, "You messenger of the Creator of earth, you 
messenger of the Creator of heaven, tell God the (heavenly) King for 
me that I am not contented at all with the child He has given to me; 
let Him change him for me. The child that I have now is as hard as 
stone: he always climbs a tree to its apex; he always hops from one 
hillock to the other; he always swims in a deep river; he always chases 
goats around the house; he always stones sheep around the road; he 
always chases people's children around the outside. His head is as
107

hard as stone. He does not know book at all except that he draws 
pictures around. He had lost the book that I bought for him recently; 
the shirt that I bought for him the other day he has torn; he is a 
chairman (at the eating of) rice, the governor of gari, a king (at the 
eating of pounded yam; and important person) at the consumption of 
soup; he is a friend to a food-owner, an enemy to the person who 
works; the boy's matter is much more than something to be counted; 
therefore, you fairy from heaven, please help me find where I shall 
place this matter; I want a soft person; I do not want a disobedient 
child."
'"After this, one man came before the Representative of God again, 
it was one clerk. When he came, he spoke with enthusiasm; he was 
talking with his head; he was talking with his neck; he said, 'You 
messenger of the Creator of earth, you messenger of the Creator of 
heaven, help me tell God that He should help me to change the hearts 
of the authorities at my working place, so  that they will stop, 
transferring me every year, so  that I would stop going from city to 
city, from village to village — going around in hectic conditions — 
what they are doing to me is not good. The decorating materials which 
I had when I first started working have all been spoilt: they were 
getting spoilt on the way as I kept tying my luggage around. My wife's 
three pots have broken; one hundred and fifty spoons were lost; the 
children could not find any mat to sleep on anymore; house 
decorating materials were dwindling everyday; we cannot even count 
the little things which we did not know how they got away; and at the 
time we started to enjoy our friends, we are parted from them. 
Therefore, I appeal to you, help me tell God the (heavenly) King, that 
He should look for another boss for me, or else He should change the 
hearts of these my bosses, so that they would consider my, wife, and 
have mercy on my children, and think about the known faces, and 
stop transferring me around."
"The one that I am going to talk about is the man who asked a 
question which greatly amazed everybody. When the man started 
talking he said, 'You messenger of the Creator of earth, you messenger 
of the Creator of heaven, what I want to ask is difficult, but I plead 
with you to do it for me. Tell God the (heavenly) King for me that the 
town in which He made me to be born is not pleasing to me; I want 
the children of the world to call me a son of another town; I do not 
want anybody to identify me with the town. Since I was born there, I 
have not been healthy at all. I had seven children and two of them 
have died; I am certain that it was the witches who killed the two of 
them. The work of farming which I had did not benefit me, because 
the soil is not good: the yams did not grow; the banana did not 
produce young ones, the melon did not grow; I never got more than 
two baskets of beans in a year. After this, I borrowed, ten pounds 
from my friend, and I began to trade; I had profit with which I paid 
108

off the money; I did the same thing, and built a nouse; after this, I 
bought an automobile and I was beginning to enjoy my life a little, but 
the people of the town are not good; they stuck their eyes into my 
body; thus after a while, one of my automobiles broke down; the 
second one ran into a tree, and it became completely ruined; it was 
God who saved me —no one died there —yet I spent (a lot) of money 
on the matter before I got out (of it). I cannot tell the number of my 
older siblings, young siblings, relatives, friends, and known faces who 
are dying every year. Am I the only one in the world?. The worst of 
all things is that the town itself is too small; nobody even knows much 
about somewhere else, and I am always ashamed whenever people 
ask me about my hometown while I am long way from there. 
Therefore, I beg you wholeheartedly, tell God the (heavenly) King for 
me, to give me another town, and that He should announce to the 
children of the world that this vicious town is not mine anymore, and 
that it was in another place that I was born.'
'"Thus all these people began to ask what they wanted; after a 
while, the Representative of God told them that everybody should ask 
about his own illness; but he told them that whoever wanted to leave 
his illness must ask for another, one in its place, one which was 
comparable to the one he had left, in terms of the evil that the illness 
was doing.
"'When the people began to ask (questions) about illness, they 
surrounded the Representative of God; they covered him up as the 
host of ants would cover a crumb of food; they were talking as if the 
palm birds were crying on the palm tree; they were walking here and 
there like the swallows flying around in the backyard; they were 
complaining as if the One who created them was not as wise as they 
were.
"'Some left headache, and picked up stomach ache; another left 
backache; he asked for footache; some blind man was asking for 
deafness; the one with guinea-worm was asking for arthritis; some 
leper was asking for epilepsy. The day was a great day for the children 
of the world - they were leaking the secret which God kept for them 
(confidentially).
"'After this, most of the people began to murmur about their 
bodies' beauty. Women were greater in number there at this time; 
people's ears heard something! One person would say that her head 
was too big and that she wanted it to be smaller; another would say 
her ears were bigger than she wanted, and that she did not want those 
types of ears anymore; another person would say that her legs were 
thinner than they should be, and that she wanted them to be a little 
bit bigger. Another person was complaining about her hair not being 
plenty enough; another one would say that the hair of her head was 
not black enough as it should be, and another person was murmuring 
that the hair which was plenty enough before was dwindling. Other
109

people were begging for eyes, because the eyes they had were not 
satisfying to them; (still) another person would say that her eyes were 
like cat's eyes; another one said her eyes were like dog's eyes;another 
person compared her eyes to those of a cow; thus they were 
complaining about themselves. Others did not even talk about the face 
at all instead, they were talking about the mouth; they were saying 
that their mouths were very wide; their mouths were round, and that 
their teeth were red. Thus the children of the world were talking, 
short legs, and long legs, small hand 
and big hands, and thus did the Representative of God listen and was 
hearing their complaints.
After the children of the world had finished the words from their 
mouths, the creature stood up, and he told them to go home, and that 
in the morning of the second day, everybody would see that he Had 
received all that he had asked for. Before all of them dispersed, he told 
them also that at the fourteenth year, after that, that he would come 
back again to visit them in the world, so he would come and hear how 
they were enjoying all the new things which they asked for. After he 
had said thus, the children of the world went into the world, and he 
also went into heaven.
"Truly, what this creature said happened; the second day all things 
happened the way he said; everybody found himself in the condition 
that he had asked for.
"But what was greatly surprising was that the week had not ended 
when the children of the world returned to their complaining-again. 
They wanted to come back to their former positions again, and before 
three years after that, noise had filled the whole world. Before six 
years, they had begun to appease and offer sacrifice to God the 
(heavenly) King so that He would let the Representative of God come 
back quickly to put them back into the former positions in which they 
were before. They tried to change God from His decision, but it was 
impossible. They sacrificed goat; they sacrificed sheep; they 
slaughtered a ram on the crossroads; they slaughtered a rooster; they 
slaughtered a hen, and they sacrificed a whole human being; But yet 
God did not send the creature until when the fourteen years were over.
"When the Representative of God came, and all the children of the 
world gathered together again, their conditions were no more 
satisfactory to them again; a host of them wanted to go back to their 
positions in which they had been before. The words from their mouths 
terrified people very much, and I want to tell a few of the changes that 
had come upon them.
"He who asked for another child, who said that his child was not 
smart, had had another who was smart, but this new child had 
entered into the prison before the Representative of God came, 
because he who is smart and had no character is worse than the person 
110

who has character, but who is not smart. The educated ones who have 
lost their conduct, are the poisonous snakes in the world, biting the 
innocent ones around at the outside, and their eyes have been blinded; 
but they are not aware of it; they are in the position of the blind leading 
the sighted people. The man who said that his child was not smart 
when the Representative of God came the first time, saw that the child 
whom he had rejected on that day, had become an important person. 
He was simply cutting people's hair before; but he took care of the
job; and he took care of the money. After a while, he began to trade 
with the money and the trading went on very well, to the extent that 
by the time the Representative of God came back, four hundred 
educated people were secretaries under this child, and he was paying 
them with his own money; thus he became the boss of those educated 
people, and they were folding their hands on their back before they 
talked to him; they were always running (towards him) whenever he 
called them, and they were always respecting him whenever he went 
to them.
"One man who said he wanted to be rich had been rich before the 
Representative of God came, but the creature from heaven met him 
in sickness; when he became rich he did not know the elders 
anymore; he began to be saucy to all the people around. At long last, 
a sickness struck him, and there was no doctor near-by, and the elders 
who knew the medicine which would help him did not (care) to help 
him, because he had been saucy to them. In the second place, before 
this sickness happened, the,robbers had attempted to kill him three 
times, but their hands did not get hold of him. At the third time, they 
stabbed him, but their hands did not get him very well, but still, they 
cut off his right thumb, and as he was running away, he plunged into 
a pit, and his right foot broke into pieces. After all, his being rich was 
a testing, and the man did not do well in the test. After he became 
wealthy, he married a host of women. He never examined their 
character before he began to marry them; he was looking at physical 
beauty and the family size, as he began to marry them. But before the 
Representative of God came, this man's mind was not at rest in the 
house: his house was filled with noise, fighting, sadness, and the 
people in the house did not befriend one another; they were great 
enemies to one another.
"'One of those who complained to the Representative of God this 
second time was one who first said that his boss' conduct was too 
tough; he had gone to another boss who was colder than water from 
the water-cooler, but other people began to cheat him, and the insult 
which they did not pass on him when he was under the tough boss 
they were passing on him (now) while he was under the soft boss; no 
single progress (of any sort).
'"The one who said that his wife was the daughter of a peasant had 
gone to marry a daughter of a wealthy man, but before the man came
111

before the Representative of God, he was not more than a (slender) 
whip; because his mind was not at rest. The wife showed him some ­
thing! She was not obedient; she did not care (for anything or 
anybody); she, was always complaining everyday; she always went 
out of the house as she liked, and she always came whenever she liked, 
and she was the one who was giving orders to the husband.
'"He who said that he did not like the teaching job anymore, and 
that he wanted to be a secretary truly found himself at the secretarial 
job, but when he first started working, the building in which he was 
working was filled with a lot of people; there were one thousand 
secretaries, and he was the least of them all; his work did not progress 
very well, because he did not possess the talent for the job which he 
was yearning for; neither did he walk with the wise ones on the job; 
he was acting like the children of the rich people (without any money 
in his hand); those did not depend upon their salaries alone, for they 
were still getting money from their fathers; thus the fact that there 
were different kinds of people on the job became like a trial to the man, 
and before the Representative of God arrived, he had gone into debt.
"'The man who asked at first that his master should stop 
- transferring him from one town to another with haste, had not left the 
town in which he had been before the representative of God came for 
the first time. For the whole fourteen years in which the creature was 
in heaven, they did not change his position. The town was not in an 
open place; it was in a corner, and nobody heard about the man 
anymore. He sat there, and he was like a king among the people; pride 
penetrated into his heart, and he began to think that there was nobody 
like him. The man's work never showed outside so much. Whenever 
his colleagues were promoted, he was not, because each time the
heads went there to visit the man, he was always priding himself 
before them; because he did not know that his work was not as good 
as those of other places; he sat down in one town; he never came out 
in the plain; he never knew that he who made a room his place of 
abode would only be limited to the room's wisdom. Where this man 
thought the world was, the world had left that place. When the 
Representative of God came, and the man came out in the midst of 
the people who had retrogressed completely, he began to be ashamed; 
his walking was unlike that of people; he was like an animal who 
(simply) put on the skin of a person over his body.
'"It was the same thing with one who said that his own town was 
not good, and that he wanted to become a native of another town. 
Truly, he became a native of another town; but within three years, all 
of his three children died, for the atmosphere ofthetown was not 
congenial to his body. His wife died, and the people of the town 
did not love him; they were conspiring against him everyday. Food 
was as expensive as (human) eyes; one yam was one pound; tin 
of (red) oil was six pounds; a bushel of yam-flour was two pounds. 
112

and a rooster was seven pounds. Thus this man's life was very 
miserable to the extent that he was tired of life, and heaven began to 
appeal to him; he wanted to go there.
"'Before the arrival of the Representative-of God, most of the sick 
ones had died; their bodies were not strong enough to carry the 
sickness which they had asked for when he first came.
"'Those who asked for the beauty of the body regretted very much: 
someone who complained that her head was too big got another head, 
which was more than a fruit of lime; the one who said her legs were 
thin had got other legs, which were like elephant's legs; the one with 
small eyes had eyes which were like table-clocks; the one with big eyes 
had eyes like those of a chicken. So were (the situations of) things: in 
an upheaval, because God the (heavenly) King did not create those 
things which the people were asking for as part of their physical 
make-ups.
"'After every individual of the children of the world had asked his 
question and told the Representative of God that they did not want 
the things they had first asked for anymore, this fellow from heaven 
burst into laughter and he answered, and he said,
'"You children of men, don't you know that he who is the 
co-ordinator of the creatures is wiser than the rest of creatures! Go and 
observe the leaves on the top of the trees and look at the little marks 
which God the (heavenly) King has artistically made; you go and 
observe the animals in the forest as they are many and are strong; and 
are following the paths on which their creators had set their feet; you 
go and take note of the host of snakes in the world; you look at the
ants as they are so many; look at all kinds of fishes, you look at most 
of them which live both on the land and in the water; don't you know 
that He who made all these things is wiser than all the rest of the 
creatures! You men, if you are aspiring to advance, it is a good 
thing; but if you are talking, if you are despising God, you are like a 
sculpture which has eyes, but it cannot see with them; which has nose, 
but it cannot smell with it, which has ears, but it cannot hear with 
them. A coveteous person cannot be happy, even if the world got 
as small as the mouth of a gourd. You, to whom God has given 
wisdom, but do not use it, have you ever heard a lion come to God 
the (heavenly) King on any day, and tell Him to build a palace for him, 
because he is the king of the animals? Have you ever seen a spider say 
that he would not spin a thread anymore? Have you ever seen a 
cock say he would not crow? Observe the birds in the air, buff-backed 
heron is flying from one tree to the other every year; a partridge is 
looking for its food on the farm; a bat is eating through the mouth, 
and it excretes through the mouth; the body of other birds is like the 
body of a white cloth; others are like velvet; another is like an 
indigo-dyed cloth, which has been dyed, and has become very black 
indeed. Don't you know that these things are amazing! You should
113

struggle to advance in all good things; but do not stretch your hands 
to that which your hands cannot reach. Immediately a child stoops to 
pick up a coveteous attitude, his parents ought to scold him; not the 
parents alone, but all the relatives as well. Coveteousness is the 
child of envy's mother; both envy and jealousy are one and the same 
thing. Therefore, you children of men take note of your way. I am 
going to heaven today; God the (heavenly) King has given me an order 
again, that I should put you in your former conditions. Good bye from 
today on; I shall not come to you any more; go on with your lives; man 
is different from an angel; those in the world, are different from those 
in heaven."
"Thus did the Representative of God, and he went to heaven, and he 
never came back again; learn from this, you Olowo-aiye, my friend.'
"Thus did Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke end his speech; after this, 
we got off the top of his house; we came to the bottom of the building; 
we were enjoying ourselves. It was not yet dark at the period which I 
am talking about. When my friend thought of something with which 
he would exercise ourselves for a while, he suggested that we should 
go to Disease's home — who is the wife of Death — but I refused his 
suggestion, for when I got to the house of her husband before this, the 
house was not inviting; it is not a good thing for one to go see Death, 
and then to go and see Disease.
"After this, we went back and climbed to the top again, and when 
we got up there, I sat down for a while without talking; I got up, and 
I put my hands in my pant's pockets, like the time when the
educated ones were bluffing, and after I had walked stately up and 
down, I went down on my bottom on the chair; I put my right leg on 
the left leg, and I held my knees with both my hands; I leaned 
backward very well on the chair; I told Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke that 
I wanted to hear a little more talk from his mouth.
"After I had said this,the man started to talk again; he said,
"'My great Olowo-aiye, you are a fop — a real man —I salute you 
for the enjoyment of my home. I want to tell you a short story today, 
and I want you to take note of the story; perhaps you might be able to 
extract one or two wisdoms from it.
'"It happened once upon a time; a king sent his wife to go and cook 
a soup for him. It was not long after that that the wife brought three 
fresh fishes before this king — one was black; one was red; one was 
white. The one that was black was very black indeed; the one that was 
red was very red indeed; the one that was white was very white 
indeed. These fishes were a surprise to the king; thus he ordered his 
wife to go and cook them for him, and she went.
'"It was not long after this, when she came back before the king, 
panting, and she began to speak; she said, 'Your Highness, I saw 
something terrible today. As I was cooking those fishes, I was going 
to turn the soup on the fire; your highness, the wall of the house in 
114


which I was cooking the food suddenly split into two, and I saw a girl 
with a sword in (her) hand who threw off my fish on the fire. This was 
all I saw, your highness; I fell down, and I fainted. When I woke up, 
I looked at my soup; the fishes have changed: they were deeply black. 
'"When the woman finished her talk, the king got up, and he said, 
'Go on and show me the fishes,' and both of them were going together . 
When they got to the house of food, the king saw that it was true 
that those fishes changed and became black like the bottom of a pot 
of soup, and this was a surprise to whoever saw them. Because of this, 
the king quickly sent for the fisherman that he should go and catch 
these three types of fishes for him.
'"In a short while, this fisherman brought three fishes like the first 
time, and the king followed his wife to the house of food; when he got 
there, he said that his wife should start cooking the soup in his 
presence. As this woman was cooking the soup, with the king sitting 
down by the pot of the soup which was boiling, with the crown worn 
pointedly (on his head) the woman took a spoon and was stirring this 
soup; but as,the spoon touched the fish, the wall of the house split into 
two; instead of a girl who darted out the first time, a strong man came 
out with a sword in his hand, and he turned the soup over on the fire. 
The king fell down, and the king's crown flew forward, the king 
fainted; the wife fainted; the messenger who followed the king 
fainted; it was when the wind blew over them that they woke up.
"'When the king got up and went into the palace and was rested, 
he sent for this fisherman, and he told him to catch three fish like those 
again. That one went again; he went and found these strange fish 
(again); this man was going with joy, because whenever the man 
brought these fish, they paid him a lot of money.
"Before the man brought the fish which the king sent for, the king 
had sent for his chiefs saying that they should come to his palace. 
When they arrived, he told them all that his eyes had seen, and told 
them also, that he wanted the thing to happen in their presence. These 
chiefs thanked the king, and they said with one accord thus: "The 
owner of the authority second only to a god, we are grateful, we will 
wait for the matter to occur in our presence.'
"'In a short while, the king's wife came to tell the king softly that 
the fisherman had brought the fish; and thus the king ordered that 
they should bring the fish before him; he said, 'Son, the matter 
between you and I has gone beyond secrecy; bring the fish, and let us 
cook the fish.'
"'So they began to cook the fish, and when it was time again to stir 
the soup, and when a chief took the spoon and began to stir the soup, 
the wall of the house split into two again, and seven big men came out 
with two-edged swords in their hands, and they turned the fish over 
into the fire again; trouble ensued; chief was bumping against chief; 
queen was bumping against queen; the king jumped out through the
115

window and the king's flowing gown was flying in the air as he was 
running away.
'"After the king's face had calmed down, he decided in his mind 
that he was going to investigate these fishes — the fish which a person 
must not cook, except if the fellow is prepared to run a race—the king 
told the fisherman that he should prepare in the morning of the second 
day, so that he should take him and his chiefs to the river where he 
caught those fishes.
'"When it was dawn the second day, after the chiefs had gathered 
together in the palace, they were ready to go to the river, the man took 
all of them, and he was taking them along. It was surprising tothe
people that they did not walk for more than three hours, when they 
readied the strange river, and nobody had ever seen the river at the 
place they found it. When they got ’there, they saw that it was a 
stagnant river. 'They walked along the bank of this. river, in order to 
see (it clearly): they walked forwards and backwards, the river was as 
clear as mirror, and they were looking at those fish plainly, as they 
were following each other around in the water. But how this river 
found its way there, and how the fish in it got to be different from 
other fishes, this matter was beyond the understanding of all the 
people. After a while, it was dark, and all of the people made their 
bedsteads by the bank of this stagnant river; they went to sleep. The 
moon was like the noon day; but as they were all asleep, the king could 
not sleep at all: he was turning around on the bed, because he did not 
understand the meaning of this river.
"'At last when his body could no longer bear it, he got up, and he 
woke up his second-in-office; he told him that he was going for the 
investigation of the river, and that if it was dawn, and he hadn't come 
back, his second-in-office should tell the people that he was a little 
tired, and that he had slept in a small house he had quickly built by 
the bank of the river. After the king had made this arrangement, he 
headed into the forest; he and God the (heavenly) King; he was going 
around the forest.
"'After it was a long time that the king had been walking around 
in fine moonlight, thus, he suddenly saw a big house in which was lit 
a light. This house was very beautiful; it was even more beautiful than 
his own palace itself. The door of the house was opened, and he went 
in. When he got in there, he was looking around to see if he could find 
a person in it; as he was doing this, he began to hear someone 
screaming in a certain room; (the person) was dying. When he got to 
the place from which the noise came, he saw a handsome man, who 
was sitting on a chair.
"'He greeted the man, and he asked a question; he said; "Accept 
my sympathy, what is really wrong with you, which makes you 
cry thus, you grown up (person)?"
"The man answered; he said, 'You, if you had known what is the 
116

matter with me, you wouldn't have said thus."
"This king answered him again; he said. Please, be not unwilling 
to tell me what is wrong with you, for we don't always know, God 
might make it possible for me to be the one who can help you.
"After this, the man picked up his own story, and he began to tell; 
he said;
"I am sorrowful man, who is suffering in the hand of a woman. 
Death is better for me than shame. I was formerly a king, and I had a 
wife whom I trusted very much (little did I know that) she was an 
old witch. In the evening, after I had eaten, she always put vicious 
spell in the water that I would drink, and I would not know anything 
about it as for as I was concerned. This spell was to make me fall asleep 
faster at night, and that after I had fallen asleep, I would not wake up 
till dawn, when she would wake me up herself.
"She did these to me several times without my knowing anything 
(about it). May God deliver us from a hypocritical woman; the mouths 
of such people are sweeter than sugar-cane, honey, and they can take 
care of men more than anybody in the world; their knees are not far 
from the ground; they can kneel down for multitude of times in a 
day. The vicious woman deceived me several times, before God 
leaked out her secret. Thus it was:
"'When I was lying down at night one day, closing my eyes without 
being asleep, something happened.
"'Two of my house-maids were talking to each other. One 
answered; he said, 'It's a pity; this man cannot give himself a day 
without saying that it was medicine that his wife put in his water for 
him to drink every night. The second one answered; he said, 'l am 
surprised, but the medicine is powerful indeed; whenever she gives 
it to our boss, immediately he will fall asleep, and he will not wake 
up unless the woman herself wakes him up. The first one answered 
again; he said, 'Yes it was after the boss had falleh asleep last night 
that she went out, and the cock crew this morning before she came.
'"Thus were the maids talking without knowing that all they said 
were in the palm of my hands, any my body began to get very restless
"When it was time to sleep, I quickly jumped on my bed, and I 
pretended that I was asleep, I was not really sleeping. The reason why 
I did that was that when I ate in the evening of that day, I did not drink 
the water which the woman gave me; I threw it away through my 
window, without her knowing that I did so.
"'As I got on the top of my bedstead in the night of this day that 
we are talking about, my wife put out the light in my room; she got 
up; she ate an alligator pepper in the mouth, and she spewed them 
out on my body; she said, 'When an attic wood is asleep it never 
gets up; you hard-headed fellow should not wake up until I get back.
"After she had said thus, she faced the way, and she was going; I
117


too gently got up; I pulled out my machete; I began to follow her 
quietly. What surprised me was that all the door on the way began to 
open as she was passing along, withouther using keys to open them, 
but as she was going, I was following her along.
'"After a while, she came to a plain outside, and I too followed her; 
after this, she left the midst of the town completely; I was following 
her. After a long time, she turned to a path; I also turned after her 
When she had gone very far on his path, she came to a plain place; it 
was very flat indeed? When she got there, she came to a plain place; it 
was very flat indeed. When she got there, she met a man who was 
waiting for her there. The man wore a big garment; it was a flowing 
garment, white, which the embroiderers had adorned with lots of 
beautiful designs. When my wife came before him, he began to be 
angry; he said, 'You have taken too long today; when you know that 
you would not be able to come, why didn't you say so yesterday; I do 
not want people to bluff on me like that at all; you mustn't do that any 
more forever.' After he had said that, my wife knelt down, and she 
began to beg him; she said that he should not be angry; (that she was 
late) because her husband did not sleep on time; she hugged this man 
and they began to kiss.
After a while they began to talk about me, and my wife began to 
leak out all the secrets that I had placed in her hand. When they began 
to talk about me, when the first one was abusing me, and they were 
entertaining themselves with the matter about me; they were 
saying it scoffingly, and they were calling me a name that (my) father 
and mother did not give me. I was angry; I pulled out my machete, 
and I jumped into their midst like lightning; I stabbed the man, and 
he fell down. My wife ran away, but she did not know that I was the 
one.
"'After this, my wife came back, and climbed to the top of the bed, 
and she slept by me. When it was dawn the second day, I did not act 
as if I knew what had happened. This wife of mine was the one who 
first greeted me: she knelt down and touched the ground very well 
with her head, and when she was about to kiss me — the vicious 
mouth with which she was kissing a father-with-a flowing-garment 
in the middle of last night — I turned my mouth to another direction; 
I told her that my mouth was hurting me.
"'When it was time to eat breakfast, I ate, and after I had eaten, I 
sat on a certain chair; my wife came and knelt before me; she 
answered, and she said, 'Your Highness, the owner of authority, 
second only to a god; the elephant's crown-of-head which is not a load 
that a child can carry; the father who surpasses other people's father; 
the head of the city;the father of the chiefs; the only one who has 
enriched them (all) — the man; an important person in the midst of 
the important people; the great one among the greats; a complete 
gentleman, the man who comes out and the people became glad, my 
118

dear father-of-the-house; I am only using your (greatness) to 
provoke the people; your Highness, I thank you; I thank you greatly; 
I thank you for your care over me; whenever I see you there is no one 
who is handsome in my eyes in this world anymore; you are my god, 
and may God make it possible for us to gain from each other. In order, 
not to prolong the matter, my father of-the-house, I have an important, 
thing to request from you. One older brother of mine, who had gone 
to a distant place away from home just came back three days ago; I 
wanted to go and see him yesterday, but I did not get the chance at 
all; all the visitors who came to visit you yesterday made it impossible 
for me to go; but I suddenly got a messenger this morning saying that 
the older brother of mine died. This matter is very painful to me. 
Your Highness, he whom I had not seen for the past three years —for 
me to see just his corpse — this is (indeed) a painful thing to me. Now,' 
what I am requesting from you is that I want you to give me chance 
in this palace to make my older brother's grave there so that I would 
be seeing the grave with my eyes; because the matter greatly affects 
me (indeed). Your Highness, may God lengthen your life.
'"Thus did my wife speak, she who was the head of the queens.
but I did not think at all that it was the man that I saw withner in the 
moonlight who was the one she was telling me he was her older 
brother; therefore, I gave her permission to go and bring the dead 
body of her older brother; I gave her some of my messengers to go 
with her, and all of Stem went with her.
'"When the wpman came back and brought thecorpse to the 
palace, and I toqk look at him, it was the man that I saW with my 
wife in the middle of the night — kissing each other — may God 
deliver us from thecounterfeit people whom the children ofthe world 
of today are portraying a3 their older brothers, who they are exalting 
as younger brothers, who they are respecting as their relatives. They 
are liars; on the daythat the rope of secrecy comeS Ipose, thereal 
relative would not be unraveled clearly.
"'When I took a look at the face of this corpse, its body was very 
full of blood; I entered the house, and I took a machete and put it under 
(my) clothes, and I called my wife; it was on this chair on which you 
found me, that I sat. When my wife came; her eyes had changed from 
mine, for she was a witch. She had also prepared for me; as I asked 
and I said, 'Welcome, is your counterfeit brother in sound health? She 
just turned her face on me, and she poured certain water on me,and" 
she bellowed in a loud voice, and I shook suddenly; she said, 'I order 
it that a change should come upon you man, for making fun of my 
lover. You should change from your legs to your hips to stone, and 
you should sit down there where you are, until I come to let you loose. 
When a yam changes, it becomes pounded-yam; when corn changes, 
it becomes starch; even if I would come to bear punishment for the 
labour of my hands from the host of heaven, still, I will not be
119

unwilling to use the power which the Creator gave to the living 
creatures or the earth in order to do evil to you. As soon as she said 
this I saw from my legs to the waist, there was no bone, no flesh, no 
vein, no more blood, all around there turned to stone, and I did not 
have control over it any more. Since that day, I have been on one spot 
like this, I cannot move (my) body any more; I do not eat, and I 
am not hungry either, and I have not died."
'"After he had said this, the man pulled up his clothes; when this 
king looked at him, truly, from waist up to (his) head alone was flesh, 
bone, and blood; from the buttocks to the downward area, down to 
the sole of (his) feet, he was stone completely.
'"After this, the king asked this man where his wife, a witch was, 
and he answered him thus, saying, 'My friend, I do not know exactly 
where she is, but what I see is that since she had turned me to the way 
you now meet me, she had turned the city over which I was a king to 
a stagnant river which you see over there with her witchcraft. The 
three types of fishes that are in the river are the three types of people 
in my town: some are Christians; some are Moslems; and some are 
pagans. Since the day that woman had done so, she has gone to dig a 
big hole in the middle of the house in which you are now; she dug the 
hole a little deep, and she put her lover whom I beheaded in it. She 
did not cover the corpse with earth; but she tied it up, and she put it 
there, with the hope that a day was coming when the corpse would 
change, and her lover would get up to come and meet her. The thing 
that is going to amaze you most is the thing that I am going to tell you 
now. The woman used to come to this house every day early in the 
morning, at about 5 am.; she always took a load of whips with her, 
and whenever she came, she would start to beat me with the whip 
until she exhausted one hundred whips, before she stopped. After she 
had finished beating me, she would go to the place where the dead 
body of her lover was in the hole; whenever she got there, she would 
say the following words: she would say, 'My friend on earth, my 
friend in heaven, on what day are you coming to see me? Because of 
you, I obliterated an entire town; because of you, I dethroned a person; 
my friend on earth, my friend in heaven, on what day are you coming 
to see me?'
'"Thus she used to say everyday; and when she had whipped me 
for a long time, she would go to the counterfeit older brother, who is 
dead, and she would be begging him to come from heaven to see her.
"'After the man had thus spoken, the king to whom he was talking 
was sad. In the first place, he was sad to hear about the punishment 
which this man was taking on this one spot; in the second place, he 
was happy because he found what he was looking for; he found the
source of the stagnant river; he knew the reason for. (the existence of) 
these three types of fishes. He asked the man a question, and he said, 
'Friend, is the woman coming early in the morning today?'The man 
120

answered, and he said, "It is a must."
'"After this, the king applied one tactic: he took his little gun; he 
put it in the pocket of his pant; he went into the grave of the woman's 
lover, which was in the palace. When he got there, he observed how 
they tied the corpse very well; after this, he untied it, and he packed 
the bones which he got, and he threw them away. After this, he gently 
covered himself with the cloth; he did not tiei t too tightly. He gently 
held his gun with his right hand; he kept very quiet; he was looking 
at the eyes of the world.
"Truly when it was early in the dawn, the woman came, and she 
began to rain whips oh her husband; she whipped him until she
exhausted one hundred whips. This husband cried a hot cry; he sighed 
the sigh of frustration; he begged, and begged, still the woman did not 
stop her hand of whipping. She had forgotten God the (heavenly) 
King.
'"After she had beaten her husband, she came to the grave of her 
lover; she shouted as she used to shout, "My friend on earth, my friend 
in heaven, on what day are you coming to see me? Because of you, I 
obliterated an entire town; because of you I dethroned a person; my 
friend on earth, my friend in heaven on what day are you coming to 
see me?"
"'After she had said thus, the king who was in the hole answered 
her; he said, "My friend on earth, my friend in heaven, I am at the gate 
of heaven. The gate-keeper did not open the door; he locked the door 
of heaven against me. If you want me to come, go and change your 
husband back to a human being, so he would be as he was before; then 
the gate-keeper will open the door, and I will come to see you."
'"When he answered thus, this woman was so happy so much so 
that as she was running to go and take the medicine with which she 
was going to change her husband, her head-tie fell off; her clothes 
came loose; her drawers was the only thing that remained on her 
buttocks as she was running along. When she drank water, she put 
the medicine, and she went to her husband and threw it over him, and 
she said, "I command you to stand up and walk around; the head 
cannot be too heavy for the neck for the owner of the body to carry 
Immediately she said this, the legs that had been a (solid) rock 
changed; and it became human body, and this man got up.
"'After she had done this, the woman came back to the grave of her 
lover; she called him in a loud voice, 'He whom I love more than all 
persons, I have finished the errand which you sent me.'
"'And the king who was in the hole replied again, and he said, "It 
remains only one task for you to perform: go and change that stagnant 
water back into a town; turn the fish in there back into human beings; 
after tills, I shall come out as a king over the town; you will be the head 
of my queens; you will be wearing the crown of money, and you will 
be wearing the gown of beads; thus the male messengers and the
121


female messengers would be coming in and out before you."
'"When the woman heard these words, she went to apply her 
medicine; immediately change had come; the stagnant water had 
become a city; the fishes became people; they were selling 
merchandise and they were buying merchandise; they were entering 
the house, and they were coming out. After this, she went back tothe
king who she thought was her lover. When she got to the edge ofthe
cave she spoke, she said; "My lover, I have done as you have said, 
come on, you, who are my lord."
'"At this time, the king answered her; he said, 'I have come; I have 
come (back) from heaven, my special lover, come on into the hole and 
pull my hand up.'
"'This woman was happy about the words that she heard; she took 
her cloth, and she wrapped it around herself very well; she tightened 
the head-tie over (her) chest very well; she was going into the hole 
to meet the one whom she thought was her lover. The king in the grave 
adjusted his gun very well; when he saw that she was drawing closely 
to him, and that he had seen her whole body clearly, he aimed at her 
chest; he stabbed the gun;the gun sounded; the dead body of the 
hard-headed one sounded 'boom' on the ground; she died com­pletely; 
she couldn't even move her body. Thus the vicious-headed 
one finished her own (life) in the world; the moon of the vicious person 
sank into the dark; the secret of the worthless one leaked out. The 
world thus understood the language, that if a vicious person is 
thriving, the good people should not change their attitudes because 
of that: a day is coming for her; I think that the elders were telling us 
in those days that all days belong to the thief; the owner has but one 
day.
"Thus my friend concluded this story; great man; my true friend, 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, who was living on the hillock of the rock.
122


Parting with Baba-Onirungbon- yeuke Who lives on the Hillock of the Rock

“As Baba-Onirungbon ended his speech, a messenger of his came up 
from downstairs, and told him that some guests had come for him, 
and all of us went down to go and see the guests.
“It was a surprise; when we got downstairs, we saw that the guests 
were not two nor three; they were a little bit many. When I counted 
them, they were twenty-four.
“After Baba-Onirungbon had greeted them and had asked them 
how they walked to get there and they explained to him that they 
missed their way, and had strayed into Igbo Olodumare, he greeted 
them very well again; he also gave them room in his house. After they 
had gone to the place he had given them, I also got up to go and greet 
them. It was then that I observed that I had known many of them at 
home before. What happened was that they too did not look at me 
very well at first.
“The first fellow whom I first observed was a man whose name 
was Ijambaforiti who was an elephant-killing hunter. The man was 
a famous person, for when he first started hunting, he did something 
which amazed all of the people in our town. Ijambaforiti was passing 
by one day, when he saw an elephant's trunk in the river. When he 
saw this, he took an arrow from his quiver; he pierced the trunk with 
force, and the arrow penetrated deeply. When this elephant picked 
Ijambaforiti, it threw him on a tree, and when elephant saw that he 
was on this tree, it uprooted the tree, and when the tree fell, it fell on 
the elephant, so Ijambaforiti fell on the elephant again; it was on this 
same elephant that, he took another arrow from the quiver and he 
pierced it. As this animal was struggling, Ijambaforiti rolled off and 
fell on the ground from the top, and he was wounded, and nobody 
knew these things at home, and it was about three days before he came 
home. But at long last, the elephant died. Since that day, the people 
started calling him Ijambaforiti, the father of elephant.
“When I looked at him very closely, and I knew it was him, and he
123

also looked at him very closely, and he knew that it was I, we greeted 
each other with joy; I said, 'Ijambaforiti the father of elephant.'
"He too answered me; he said, 'It is I, the man.
"I burst into laughter again, and I said, 'Ijambaforiti the father of 
elephant.'
"He also drew closer to me; he said, 'This is me in your hand.' When 
he drew close to me very well and playing with me, he pressed my 
stomach with his hand; he said, 'Olowo-aiye, your stomach is 
protruding', I also said, 'What else shall we do?'
"As Ijambaforiti and I were playing this way, I saw one of my 
people whose name was Enia-pele who was my in-law at home, 
because he was the one who married the daughter of my older brother 
who was my relative. He was a wise man, and all of us in our house 
loved the man. It was at the time I was getting ready for Igbo 
Olodumare that he was celebrating the death of his father whose 
name was Iwatutu who was an important person in our town. 
Enia-se-pele was a very gentle man, and he was handsome as a man. 
It was right plainly in my presence they gave twelve girls to Enia- 
se-pele as gifts at the same time, but he did not marry them. He was 
a very wise fellow, for as girls were entering his house in the noon, 
and were entering in there in the middle of the night, he did not marry 
them, after he had married my older sister's daughter of whom I'm 
talking about. He was the one who used to sing a song in our house 
thus, 'One woman, a lot of enjoyment; two women, two troubles; three 
women, three troubles, four women, four troubles; five women, five 
troubles, six women, six troubles, seven women, seven troubles; etc.'
"When Enia-se-pele and I saw each other, we embraced each other, 
and he also told me a lot of things. As we were rejoicing, I was looking 
at a man, who had been laughing since the time I had reached these 
guests' place, and when I looked at him closely, I saw that it was the 
fellow whom I had known (before). He was completely an unwise 
person; his behaviour was like that of an animal, and his steppings 
were like those of sheep. This was the reason why all the people of 
our town used to call him Agutan-inaki, a dumb man. He was a 
fellow who did not know (anything) more than to continue to laugh 
(at all times). He never (had time) to think even for, a day, and if a 
person was behaving stupidly in our town, they used to compare the 
fellow with Agutan-inaki, whose oriki was a dumb man.
Agutan-inaki used to prepare food for his wife in their home. 
Whenever he finished pounding pounded-yam, and had prepared 
and had finished cooking soup, he would place  them before 
his wife, and that one (the wife) would be scolding him saying that 
the food he had prepared was not good enough, she would be hissing 
and complaining about the food. Agutan-inaki was a spoilt person: 
he was one of those who never knew when people were making fun 
of them; when they put on a buba and you began to flatter them 
124

saying that they were wearing dandogo made out of sanyan 
material, they would be pleased with you; when they put on the 
clothes which do not fit them, and you said that their clothes were 
better than that of a king, they would be pleased with you; when they 
spoke at a meeting, they would be asking continuously; 'Don't you 
see that my speech was better than that of the rest (of the people)?' 
This is the type of person that Agutan-inaki was. Because of this, when 
I saw him, I only greeted him through my nose
"Another person whom I observed that I had known (before) was 
one Ifa priest, whose name was Ewedaiyepo. The man had a lot of 
medicine. All the people in our town knew him. He lived in the 
ground-hole for seven days, when he took one gnome as wife, before 
they left each other. There was not a leaf in the forest which this man 
did not know, and there was no root of a tree that could hide from 
him. He used to talk to trees; he understood animal's language; he 
understood that of birds, and he understood that of the fish in the 
water. When I saw him, I began to call him by his oriki; I said, 
'Ewedaiyepo, the world's herbalist; Ewedaiyepo the heaven's 
herbalist; an important one of the Ifa priests, a deamonic man, 
Ewedaiyepo, you in a playful manner, you became their husbands, 
he who in a joking way,'became the father of evil spirit; he who made 
a sigidi his servant who made a loincloth out of leather girdle. 
Ewedaiyepo, the man; you are their father; you have been made to be; 
he who walks around arrogantly, is going to experience a disgrace.'
"Thus I started to say this man's oriki, and he too was nodding, 
answering me at intervals. Immediately I stopped, I saw 
Ewedaiyepo stick his hand in his pocket, and he brought certain white 
medicine out of a gourdlet, and he began to rub my head with it, and 
my head became white — thus Ewedaiyepo turned me into a 
white-headed fellow on the sweltering afternoon, and all the people 
were looking at my crown of head as they were greeting me, for if it 
were a black medicine, it would have suited my head. I began to beg 
for soap around unexpectedly, and I used up to a penny's worth, 
before I wasn't white-headed fellow any more.
"After this, the one whom I observed again was a man whose name 
was Ibanuje-isale. I did not greet the man very well, because since 
the day I had known him, I had never seen laughter in his mouth. He 
was one of those who had bad behaviour, in terms of frowning their 
faces at all times; nobody knew the difference between the time that 
they were happy, and the time that they were unhappy. And this type 
of attitude gives one a (bad) name and throws away a persons oppor ­
tunity; it always turns a big person to a small person; a gentlemen who 
sees that this kind of attitude is becoming habitual with him should 
quickly deviate from the attitude, because it is a stain on a fellow .22 
When I saw Ibujisale, I looked at him with small eyes, and when 
I was going to greet him, I greeted him like an unimportant person.
125

As I was looking at Ibanuje-isale, I saw a fellow whom I had 
known very well before. The man could Sing a lot, and he could talk 
a lot; thus people called him organ-voiced (man) in our town. When 
I looked at the direction where he was, and I saw him, I called him, I 
said, 'My friend, Mr. Organ-voiced hello: it's been quite a long time.' 
He also answered; he said; O, yes, Olowo-aiye, this is me in your 
hand. I also answered again:,I said; 'Organ-voiced man, who sings like 
a bird'; he also answered; he said, 'Olowo-aiye, it is I who have told 
you, there is nothing (wrong with me) the body of a man is always 
very strong. I salute you for your eating; I salute you for your drinking; 
I salute you for eating without asking about me.'After this, we 
greeted each other very well again, and we made a lot of jokes. But he 
could talk a lot: If one wanted to stop (and talk to him) for two minutes, 
one would stay for four minutes. When I had stopped for a long time' 
and Organ-voiced was tying me down with talking, I began to go 
without asking to be excused by the people.
''As I was going. Organ-voiced was looking at the back of mV head 
until the time that I suddenly heard the fellow hiss, and he said, 'Look 
at the back of his head.' When I looked back, I saw that his 
countenance was not good towards the back of my head; I said; 'Why 
don't you go and sit down, people look at another fellow's back of the 
head; they never look at their own back of the head. You can talk of a 
lot; I do not have much time as you do; things should always be 
limited.
"Those who were important among the pilgrims that I knew are 
the ones I have just listed as follows:
"Baba-Onirungbon was very hospitable to them that night; all of 
them ate, and they were filled to the brim.
"When I saw how many these guests were, and the amount of 
money that Baba-Onirugbon had been spending on me since I had 
arrived, I was greatly surprised. If a gentleman goes to a place as a 
guest, he needs to know when it is time to leave the place, for the 
unenlightened people do not recognize the attitude of greed as a bad 
thing; if your host begins to spend too much, it behoves the guest to 
know that he has to get ready to go. Even if the host insists that one 
should stay, one ought to continue to say the one is going.
"After we had eaten the evening meal, and all of us were sitting on 
the mat in a row, and we were talking in the moonlight with Baba- 
Onirungbon, I started talking about going (back); I asked from Baba- 
Onirungbon, if he knew the way we could take to get back to our 
house.
"When I said this, Baba-Onirungbon told us that truly there was a 
road by which we could go to our house, but he told us that also that 
the road was very dangerous indeed. He again emphasized it very 
well, that we should not think about going at all; because if we went, 
there was no doubt that many of us would perish on the way.
126

“When I told him to give-some advice (about) the way through 
which we could go; he told us that the advice he could give us was 
that we should stay there with him, and that we should find work, 
and that we should eat out of our labour. After he had said this, 
Enia-se-pele asked him again; he gaid that he should tell us the things 
that could be problematic to us on the way, and the man enumerated 
the problems; he said that we would pass through the town of the 
snakes, where Ojola-ibinu was reigning as the king, and that if we 
were not careful, we could lose our lives there. After this, he told us 
again, that we would reach where there were seven women who were 
always chasing each other all their lives, and that if we looked into 
their direction and saw the type of play they were playing, we would 
not be able to help it; whether or not we wanted to, we would join 
them in the play, and that we would not be able to get out of there 
forever. He also told us various other things that would be 
problematic to us: he spoke about some vicious gnomes and two birds; 
the carnivorous animals and the poisonous grubs. Thus did 
Baba-Ohirungbon enumerate all those vicious things that could be 
obstacles to us on the way, if we insisted that we were going.
“After he had ended his speech, Ijamba-foriti got up in our midst, 
and he began to speak; he said, 'You my comrades, all, look at me very 
well, I, Ijamba-foriti the father of the elephant. I do not mind an uproar 
in the middle of the night. I am asking all of you today, can a person 
find an important thing without meeting  with an important 
difficulty? Have you seen anyone who had reached a great position 
without having done a great thing behind them? He who is in the 
world and walks (around) with fear, is not among the living; if the 
great people were telling all the things they have come across before 
they became great people, other people would have been praying to 
die in backward positions. Therefore, we must go. My dear 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, I thank you all for your taking care of us in 
the past, may God enrich your pockets. This is what I want you to do 
for us: I want you to describe the way for us very well, for if God does 
not reject (my) promise, I would not be here at the dawn of the day 
tomorrow. There is no one a person should be afraid of; except God. 
Death is better for a gentleman than insult; it does not behove a 
gentleman to walk around like a greedy one; if we go to a long distance 
away from home; we must take home the reward of the farm; it is a 
must that we should go.'
“Thus Ijamba-foriti spoke, and all of us kept deadly silent; as he 
was going to sit down, he stood up again, he faced us, and he said, 
'You our people, we are going tomorrow; you follow me; I will be 
your leader. Begin to tie your luggage; make your hearts strong; we 
have an important person in our midst: Mr. Olowo-aiye is here; he is 
an important person; Enia-se-pele is also here; he is an important 
person; here I am also, Ijamba-foriti, the father of the elephant; God is
127


for us; we are going.'
"When Ijamba-foriti had sat down the second time, I got up; I 
backed his speech up. After I had sat down. Organ-voiced got up, and 
he also began to speak, and the voice of Organ-voiced was so sweet 
at when he sat down, Baba-Onirungbon looked at his face; he said, 
'God has put salt-on your lips';
"Thus we all spoke with the determination that we shall go on the 
second day, by God's power.
"After we had thus determined, and Baba-Onirungbon saw that it 
was certain that we were going, he decided to help us to the extent of 
his ability. He entered and he brought out a flute, and he showed it to 
us. He asked us if there was anyone who knew how to play a flute 
among us, and Organ-voiced answered him that he could play a flute 
very well. After this, he put the flute in Organ-voiced's hand, and he 
told him that when we were getting near the town of the snakes, he 
should start playing it, and that if the police who were watching the 
gate of their town heard the flute all of them would fall asleep. He told 
us these police-snakes who were watching were the most terrible 
ones; for if we were able pass them, our troubles would be over; unless 
we did not follow all the things he had told us. He also gave us one 
rule after this; that we should not kill any snake at all in the town, and 
he inculcated that on us very strongly. He told us that he who killed 
a snake in the town of the snakes would experience the fight of a snake 
and it was specifically a taboo in that town. He warned us very well, 
because if we got into the town, we would be seeing all kinds of snakes 
that would be playing around, selling merchandise and buying 
merchandise in our presence. After that, he spoke about Ojola-ibinu, 
who was the king of the town of the snakes among the creatures that 
were crawling on their chests, and that we must be careful not to
fight with the snakes in the town. After this, the man gave a big gourd 
to Ewedaiyepo; the body of the gourd was black and shinny; they tied 
the bones of snake around the neck of the gourd; its mouth was 
covered with various kinds of feathers. The man told Ewedaiyepo that 
it was poison antidote that was in the gourd, and that until we got
home, each one of us should be taking half a spoon out of it everyday, 
and that if we did this, no snake poison could harm us. But he 
impressed it upon our ears very well that the power of the half of 
a spoon which we would take would not last more than a day; we 
must not skip a day without taking this medicine until we should 
get home.
"Baba-Orurungbon-yeuke did a lot for us. He also gave us a bottle 
of water, and he told us that if we experienced any difficulty on our ’ 
way, the water would be of help to us. He told us that the water of a 
river flowed through heaven, and that there was no one who could 
take out of the water, his eyes saw something, because he told us 
that if it were not because of his friend. Death, whose house was
128

midway between earth and heaven, he would not have been able to 
fetch the water at all. As he had told us, when he was going to fetch 
the water, he borrowed the garment that the dead used to wear 
before they could to go heaven, from the hands of Death, that was 
what he wore before he could get to the bank of this strange river 
which flowed through heaven. The man told us also that whoever 
fetched the water in heaven must not face (the direction of)the water 
when he was fetching it; instead of that, he had to turn his back against 
it. The reason was that nobody should look at the water, because he 
who looks at it would be looking at the throne of God the Master of 
glory and the powerful in-spirits who were standing around the 
throne of God and were praising Him who made them, who made 
others, who made all of us. And, he who sees the holy ones who 
surrounded the throne of God, has seen something; he who sees the 
shadow of God sees trouble; he who knows the seat of the Creator 
would not be able to imagine what would happen to him.
''Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke told us that the water in the bottle which 
he gave to us was a strange water, and that there was nothing we could . 
not do with it: if we poured it on shrub and we told the shrub to change 
to a human being it would become a human being; if we said that it  
should change into an animal, it would become an animal, because  
the authority of God was on its body. About its use, Baba-Onirungbon 
told us thus: he said, 'When you are using this water, you must not ' 
eat oil,'you must not eat salt; you must not eat pepper; you must 
be naked completely, just as, you came to the world, and the way you 
would go to heaven.'
"Thus did the man try his best possible (to help us), and all of us 
thanked him very much. Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke is a gentleman, 
who lives on the hillock of the rock: he took care of us very much. 
When it was the morning of the second day, when we were going to 
leave the house, I almost wept, because I had nothing to give to the 
children of the house. When I searched in my pocket, I found only 
three pence, and I was ashamed to give this to them. When I searched 
in my pocket again, I found one bean-cake which my mother gave me 
the other day, and I took a little out of it, and gave them. My certain 
pair of shorts was what I gave to my friend's messengers. But 
Baba-Onirungbon was not happy about all this solicitude that I was 
showing; all his cares over us was not a big deal to him. He was one 
of those that would not do kindness in order for people to repay it, 
the hope of whom is in the hands of God the (heavenly) King. Those 
who know that most of the children of men are vain, and if he who 
is doing the act of kindness hopes that the people to whom he is doing 
the act of kindness should appreciate the kindness, that fellow is 
leaning his back against emptiness. I suppose that when the Son of 
God himself did an act of kindness to the ten lepers, it was only one 
of them that came to express thanks! The children of the world
129

always want to dig out yam where they have never sown yams- they 
always ask for bananas where they had not kept banana; those who 
cannot give out a penny always want people to give them six pence. 
Therefore, I seriously prayed so that my friend would know that I 
knew the worth of what he had done for me, and I rejoiced to know 
that he himself knew my worth, because when we parted with each 
other, our spirits did not part with each other: we were still writing 
each other, and I am still getting his letters up till today. You will read 
some of the letters we wrote to each other later.
we left Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's who was living on the 
hillock of the rock's place, our eyes saw something on the way the 
one which the mouth could speak about, and the one the mouth could 
not speak about were the things that we saw with our eyes and the 
things which we came across; if it were not because God was a great 
King, I would not have been up to a person who would be talking 
(about it) today. When it was the afternoon of the second day that we 
left the man's place, at three o'clock exactly, we came near the town 
of the snakes where Ojola-ibinu was their king.
"When we were about to enter the town, we began to hear the cries 
of all kinds of birds and squirrels. After a while, when we came to a 
street, we were looking at those police of the snakes afar off; they were 
sliding, and they were looking at our direction. My buttocks turned 
into water; the string of my pants came untied. What (actually) 
surprised me was that the police resemble human beings a little bit:
their heads were like human heads, but their bodies were snake
bodies. They had two feet which were short, and they were walking 
well. Their tails were long, and their bodies had large scales. 
There was not anyone among those police, who was not as big as 
greatly looking man. They (certainly) daunted one very
greatly.
"Immediately we came before them, Organ-voiced had begun to
blow the flute. As he was blowing the flute, we saw that all of them
had fallen asleep; we simply passed them by. But it hurt (my heart) 
that it was there that Agutan-inaki lost his life. When we woke up 
in the morning of the day we were going to this town of the snakes, 
and we began to drink the antidote which Baba-Onirungbon gave to
us, Agutan-inaki said that the medicine was too bitter, and he did not
drink it with us on that day. When we were getting close to the place 
where the policemen were, he said he wanted to pass stool, and we 
were waiting for him to finish quickly, but when he did not finish on 
time we got ready, and we were walking slowly along before he got 
finished. When we passed the police, we saw him coming down, and 
we knew that these police would not be awake before he passed them by.
But when Agutan-inaki was coming, he began to make noise, and 
he was shouting in a loud voice, and his voice filled the whole forest
greatly. When this noise was too much, the police snake woke up, and 
130

they caught the fool and bit him. Immediately, the snakes' poison 
gripped the man. Let us not drag the matter as long as earth and 
mat, it was there that Agutan-inaki just ended his own life.
''Thus we did, and we lost one of our people, Mr. Agutan-inaki, a 
dumb man; when all of us were crying, Ijamba-foriti did not cry at 
all; instead of that, he began to whistle a proverbial song saying, 'A 
blind man who closes his eyes and says he cannot see, when he was 
not asleep, what did he see? He who does one (in) does himself (in). 
This means that it was Agutan-inaki who did himself in with his own 
hands.' Agutan-inaki was singing so that the police snakes would 
wake up so that they would disrupt the faces of all of us, but the more 
he shouted, the faster we walked; when the police woke up, they did 
not see us anymore, but they saw him. Till we got back home, if a 
person said he was not going to take a medicine, we used to call him 
Agutan-inaki.
"When we left those police snakes' place, we started meeting 
snakes one by one, but they did not bite us; they were just going their 
own (way). When we walked a little, we began to see all fences that 
the snakes made, (the fences) in which they put a lot of frogs, and they 
were taking care of them. As we were walking closer forward, we 
continued to see these fences of frogs —(the frogs) —which the snakes 
were domesticating like goats. Frog is their food, and they entertain 
their guests with it. In these fences, I saw with my naked eyes, a frog 
as big as a rooster. The path to the snakes' town was smooth, but it 
would have been better if it were not for many of their skins which 
they peeled on the ground which created debris along the path. At 
times when we were going, a snake would suddenly fall on the road 
in front of us; sometimes a snake would fall on our shoulders; 
sometimes the snakes would coil around our feet, they would be 
playing with us.
131

8
Ojola-ibinu who is the Head of all the Snakes in the World

"As we entered into their town itself, something happened to us.
"When a snake began to coil round his body, Ijamba-foriti's body 
rejected this punishment, because the snake began from his feet to the 
shoulder; when it reached his shoulder, it stopped; it did not go any 
more. After a while again, the second snake started to crawl on 
Ijarnbaforiti's body; this also crawled on his body up to his shoulder, 
and when the two s.akes saw each other, they began to play around 
the man's neck. When it had been long since they had been there, and 
they did not go away, Ijambaforiti became angry; heheld his pant and 
tightened it tightly; he took his gun; he adjusted it, and he faced us; 
he looked at us as a powerful person looks at a person; he burst into 
laughter; he said, 'He who wants to die meets him who wants to kill 
him; I Ijambaforiti, the man; I can take all things but I do not take 
insult, a person does not die twice; if death takes me, I will follow 
death.'
"As soon as he said this, he took both of these snakes, and dashed 
them to the ground. After this, he took a stick and beat them on the 
head — something had come! 
"As Ijambaforiti had done this, we suddenly heard a bell which 
rang, and before we blinked our eyes, those police-snakes had arrived, 
and they began to bite us, but their poison had no effect on us, because 
of the medicine which we had eaten in the morning of that day. When 
they saw that nothing happened to us, they took us to the house of 
Ojola-ibinu who was the head of all the snakes in the world.
"A! God is great a King! When we got before Ojola-ibinu, the 
thought in my mind changed. I did not think that I would be in this 
world any more. Since the days that I have been walking around, I 
had never seen a creature as daunting as Ojola-ibinu who was the 
head of all the snakes of the world. Ojola-ibinu was very big indeed; 
it was a creature which crawls on its chest. But it had the head of 
human, except that its mouth was bigger than that of a person. A 
132


sheep could not fill Ojola-ibinu at a time; he used to eat up to two 
whole cows whenever he wanted to eat.
"When we got to the palace of this king of the snakes, we met him 
on the throne; he sat in a royal state, and all his chiefs surrounded him. 
This king was so handsome that his whole body was as if a host of 
precious stones were gathered together in one place; after Ojola-ibinu 
had coiled around, it looked like a small hill.
"When they took us before the king of the snakes, he was very, very 
angry when he saw us, and his head began to get bigger; all his chiefs 
began to hiss and were angry because of us. When Ojola-ibinu began 
to talk, his throat began to roar like thunder, and his eyes were like 
red beads. He bellowed with anger; he said thus:
"Man! Man!! Man!!! You have come here seeking for me; you 
children of men! A! A!! A!!! (No one) except God, the Master of glory 
alone can abate the fight that is between us; a poisonous snake is 
man's enemy; if man sees a snake in the plain, man kills it; if man sees 
a snake in the secret man kills it; there is no enmity which is like the
enmity between snakes and man, except the enmity which is between 
the son of the Devil and the son of God the(heavenly) King.
"Take these ones, you my police; take them to my courtyard. Look 
for the fat one among them, slaughter him for me; I shall make all of 
them my food; the end of a murderer is destruction;I must kill those 
who kill my children; a day is coming when the day would dawn on 
those who pursue their neighbours, as long as my heart is still alive, 
I shall not see the son of man with my eyes, and let the son of man go.'
"When he finished saying this, the vicious creature burst into 
laughter, and his chiefs shouted in one voice, Your Highness, the one 
with authority the second (in rank) to the gods; the death that kills the 
disobedient child, a trouble upon the children of man, the powerful 
over those hard headed ones. Your Highness, Your Highness, Your 
Highness.'
"After this, they took us to the backyard, and when we got there, we 
met twenty-five people like us there. Those people had strayed into the 
hunting forest, and they had fallen into the hands of the king of the 
snakes. When we got to where they were, and we looked into one part 
of the courtyard, we saw the skeleton of human skulls which were there; 
they were more than one thousand. At this time that I am talking about, 
I was not afraid any more, because my mind had begun to get out of the 
world, and I had begun to think about heaven. Those police arranged all 
of us in order; they examined all of us along. They felt our buttocks with 
their hands, and they examined our chests to see how much fat we had. 
When they got to me, they took a certain man who was standing by me, 
who was a little fatter than I was, and when they had examined him, they 
slaughtered him right in our presence.
"After a short while, they brought food for us, but I did not eat the 
food, because when they wanted to bring the food, I heard them when
133

they were having an arrangement: they were complaining in the 
kitchen whether or not the medicine they had put in the food was 
enough to make us fat. The messengers of the king were just talking 
secretly, but I stood close to the wall of the kitchen, and I heard what 
they were saying. My partners ate the food, but I ate out of the 
bean-cake which my mother brought for me from the hole of the 
dead. Before the morning of the next day, all the people I came with 
had changed: they had become big and fat. Enia-se-pele and 
Ewedaiyepo who had not been as fat as I was, had got bigger than I 
was. Ijambaforiti whose body had been very strong had become one 
whose body had become soft, and he was fat and sleek.
"When I saw this, I called my colleague in a secret place, and I told 
them what I had observed and heard, and I told them also, that I had 
a bean-cake in my bag which couldn't be exhausted, no matter how 
thought we should just be eating the bean-cake.
When it was noon the second day, the messengers of Ojola-ibinu 
came; they took somebody who was fat among us; they slaughtered 
him again for their king. Ijambaforiti was almost taken, but when they 
examined him carefully, they said that he was not fat enough for 
consumption.
"Thus they began to give us food at various times on that day, but 
none of us ate their food. When it was the third day, they took one
fellow among those that we met there again. They slaughtered that 
one again for their king.
Thus they began to kill us one after the other, and I was expecting 
the day when it would be my turn to die; but as they were bringing 
food for us, I did not eat their food; it was the bean-cake which my 
mother gave me that I was eating, and it was that that the rest of my 
colleagues those of us who left Baba-Onirungbon's house — were
eating. This also did us a lot of good, because it did not allow us to get 
fatter, instead, we were getting thinner, as we were thinking about 
what we were going to do. After they had killed many of us, and those 
of us who were left were not many anymore, we began to be afraid 
that at last they might come to take us, whether we were fat or not. 
On a certain day, I lifted up my eyes; I called upon God; I said, 
Thou God the (heavenly) King, may it please thee to come and deliver 
me from this bondage. There is nothing difficult in the hands of God 
the (heavenly) King; there is no sorrow that can come upon the son of 
man, there is no trouble that can come upon man, from which you 
cannot bring man out: from the hands of the sorrow of (the pack of) 
money, from the hands of the sorrow of (lack of) child, from the hands 
of the sorrow of the enemy in the house, from the hands of the sorrow 
or the enemy from the outside, from the hands of the sorrow at the 
working-place; from the hands of the sorrow of the relatives, you God 
are the only One on whom one can lean one's back; deliver me O God; 
God deliver me from the hands of Ojola-ibinu; deliver me God: God
134

deliver me; from the hands of the police snakes, deliver me; God, God, 
deliver me; from the hands of being locked up in the sweltering 
afternoon, deliver me O God; O God deliver me.
Thus I began to say. Little did I know as I was speaking, one of 
these police snakes was hearing what I was saying, and this police was 
one of the messengers whom the children of men used to come and 
meet in the world — those who are lazy and the hypocrites who used 
to be tale-bearers in order to curry favour from their bosses — so that 
that fellow would not know their secret. This police snake took my 
matter to Ojola-ibinu; he said that I had handed him (Oiola-ibinu) to 
God the (heavenly) King.
"When Ojola-ibinu heard this, he bellowed greatly, and his voice 
roared like thunder; he said, 'Who is the God who can deliver ypu 
from my trap, you children of men! What does God amount to in 
my presence? Truly the earth-spirits say that God created all things 
in the world and in heaven; even if it were so, I myself, I am great in 
my own royalty: I am the head of all the snakes in the world. 
Tomorrow is your last day on earth, when your cranium would go 
into my pot of soup; if I do not kill all of you tomorrow, you might as 
well say that it was not my father who begat me.
"When I heard about this matter, I was sad, but when I thought 
about the matter again, I was happy. On one hand, when I heard that 
the day of my death had been named, I was sad; on the other hand, I 
knew that the destruction of Ojola-ibinu was not too far away, for on 
any day that a creature says that the matter about God is not worth 
anything, that fellow's destruction has already begun. I kept quiet; I 
was waiting to see what God would do.
After a short while, I called all my colleagues together; I asked that 
each of them should let me know the weapons that were in his hands, 
and I told  them point-blank, that we ought to do something before the
creature slaughtered us to eat. I remembered the fight between 
Anjọnnu-ibẹru and I at the gate of Igbo Olodumare, thus I promised 
to perform seven wonders. All those who were important among us 
were happy about my suggestion. Everybody was prepared to fight 
a little fight, so we would act like men.
"But those police have taken all our weapons since we had arrived 
there, and they had put them in the treasury of Ojola-ibinu, and there 
were many snakes guarding the treasury.
"As we were thinking about how we were going to get our things, 
Enia-se-pele told us that he had had a friend among those messengers. 
Little did we know that as we were thinking about death, Enia-pele 
was thinking about the way out, and he had found a way to know the 
secret of the place. Ojola-ibinu was one of those creatures who do not 
take dare of their houseboys; since we had refused to eat our food, 
Enia-se-pele had been using thefood to curry the favour of this 
houseboy. We did not even know anything in our own case, but what
135

we were seeing was that whenever they brought food, it was 
Enia-se-pele that was getting it from them; and we did not know 
where he was taking it to — we did not know that he was giving this 
food to the houseboy, and they became each other's friends from that 
point.
"When we called this houseboy, and I took a little out of the 
bean-cake and gave it to him, we begged him to go and bring our 
things out from the treasury house, and he also agreed with us, but 
he told us that it should be at the time that the ones guarding the house 
would finish the day's work, and leave the palace, before he would 
go and bring our things.
"At five o'clock in the evening, those who were guarding the house 
finished their work, and they left the palace. As they were leaving the 
palace, this houseboy entered the treasury house and brought our 
luggage out.
"We gave most of our medicines to Ewedaiyepo to take care of 
them, for he himself was a herbalist who loved bluffing: if we touched 
his medicines, he would be threatening us, and he was eating alligator 
pepper in his mouth at all times, and he used to call the name of 
Oduduwa; he used to talk about Agbonniregun, ’ he was always 
plucking leaves around the forest.
"When we had gathered our weapons together, and we had given 
our important medicines to Ewedaiyepo, we began to think about the 
way to go. Before we could go, we had to kill Ojola-ibinu himself, and 
that was a big thing. When we thought about the way we were going 
to do this and we could not find one, Enia-se-pele gave us a 
suggestion. Ojola-ibinu was a creature who was crawling on his chest, 
and it was on his chest that he crawled to take a bath everyday. He 
used to go and take a bath at ten o'clock in the morning every day. 
This wasEnia-pele's suggestion: that we should go and find many 
matchete and sharpen them, and make them very sharp; at night, we 
should go and bury those matcheted with their sharp edges outside. 
When Ojola went to bath, if he put his mouth on the machetes, and 
the matchetes cut him, he would want to quickly get out of that place, 
and when he ran forward, then the machetes would be cutting his 
chest along. By so doing, he would cut his guts out. This suggestion 
was good, in our view; we thanked Enia-se-pele, and we decided to 
follow the advice. We gathered the machetes together; we sharpened 
them, and they were as sharp as pen-knives. When it was in the middle 
of the night, we went to bury the machetes on the path of Ojola-ibinu, 
and we turned the sharp edges up all along.
"After this, we tied our luggage and put them down. Everyone of 
us took his own weapon in his hands, but most of our medicines were 
in the hands of Ewedaiyepo.
"Very early in the morning of title second day, Ojola-ibinu truly got 
ready; he was going to bathe without knowing that the day had come 
136

when God would tell him that He was existing. When he put his 
mouth on the sharp machete, the machete began to cut him, and he 
also began to run forward; the machete began to cut his belly along. 
After a while, Ojola-ibinu bellowed so loudly that all the people of the 
town woke up from their sleep, and the earth shook greatly. This 
creature began to struggle, but as he was doing this, all his guts came 
out, and the ground was filled with blood, and something happened 
among the snakes. Before Ojola-ibinu died, he knew that we were the
ones, and he shouted our names all the way to heaven. He shouted in 
a loud voice saying, 'Man! Man!! Man!!! I have gone away from you!'
"Thus it happened that when Ojola-ibinu blasphemed God the 
(heavenly) King, (his) guts came out; the liver came out; the stomach 
came out in the plain. May God forbid this type of thing in our midst. 
"But we too have known that he who killed the head of the snakes 
is pulling the leg of trouble; the eyes of he who behaves in the way we 
had behaved would see something. Since the strange creature had 
shouted, we all had tightened the strings of our pants. But when 
everyone of us had taken his machete, and had carried his gun, and 
we saw that the medicine in our hands would not be enough for the 
fight, and we wanted to go and see our important medicine which we 
gave to Ewedaiyepo to keep, we could not find Ewedaiyepo anymore; 
he had absconded completely. Little did we know that when 
Ojola-ibinu bellowed greatly, Ewedaiyepo had climbed up to the attic.
"As we were looking around for Ewedaiyepo, somebody came 
secretly to tell us that Ewedaiyepo was not in the room, and that he 
had run up to the attic. This made me to go and search the attic to see 
whether or not the matter was true; when I got there, I met the man 
where he stooped down, so I got the medicines, and I hit his pate with 
our medicine bag; I was going, and I was hissing — in my own case, 
—he also shamefully followed me. Thus there are many people in our 
world who are calling themselves Ifa priests, but who are not bold, 
enough to use the medicine which they know; thus they frightfully 
turn themselves into frivolous person. He who has medicine, but is 
not bold is not as strong as the one who is bold, but does not have 
medicine at all. But we made fun of Ewedaiyepo because of this 
matter. The matter never parted from our mouth until we left the 
town of the snake, until we got back to our hometown. Whenever 
Organ-voiced stood up, he would turn his face to us: he would say, 
'You my friends, when Ojola-ibinu shouted a great shout, 
Ewedaiyepo did what?' All of us would respond in unison that 
'Ewedaiyepo climbed up to the attic.' And Ewedaiyepo would get 
annoyed: he would say, 'I don't like that, Olowo-aiye, I don't like that.' 
At times he would say, 'Enia-se-pele be very careful;' he used to say 
so to us whenever we were happy, and we began to make fun of him.
"After we had taken all our medicine, we got prepared to fight a 
war, and the snakes rumbled with us in the fight also."
137






'Ijambaforiti was the one who first finished tying things around his 
body among us; as he got ready, he darted outside, and he shouted; 
he said, 'He who is up to it, let him come out, Ijambaforiti is ready; 
Ijambaforiti is going.'
"Immediately he said that, a host of the snakes who had been 
standing around the palace knew that we were the ones who killed 
their king, and before we blinked our eyes, Ijambaforiti had gone to 
them, and some of our people followed him. Enia-se-pele and I and 
Organ-voiced were in the palace over there with the rest of the people; 
we were getting ready. Since the king had died, the messengers, the 
chiefs, the wives, and the children had run away.
"When we got ready in the palace, and we go out, we, with the 
guns and our machetes, fought a big fight with the people. The snake 
coiled around Ijambaforiti, to the extent that we could not see him 
anymore. But when we looked at the ground, we saw the dead snakes 
all over the ay it please thee to come and deliver me from this bondage. 
There is nothing difficult in the hands of God the (heavenly) King; 
there is no sorrow that can come upon the son of man; there is no 
trouble that can come upon man, from which you cannot bring man 
out: from the hands of the sorrgs of (the drinking it, we did not see 
certain six people, and when the fight was hot, five out of them died. 
The sixth person who was the younger brother of Agutan-inaki on 
the motherside whose name was Ile-nu-iku-wa died on the way, 
after we had left the town.
"This fight was so much: it surpassed what mouth could describe, 
but at last, we were grateful to God the (heavenly) King that we were 
the victorious ones. When we were beginning to get tired, Enia-se- pele, 
who had not eaten oil, who had not eaten salt, had taken a lot of sand; 
he had put it into the big pots all along; after that, he took the water 
which Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke had given to us; he sprinkle it on the 
sand, and he shouted in a great voice; he said, 'I command, in the name 
of God, the living Lord, the Holy One, the Master of glory, the 
Mediator, the One on whom one leans one's back,the merciful, the 
wondrous One, the Creator of man, the Creator of the universe, the 
Creator of heaven, the Creator of everything which we see, the Creator 
of the things invisible. He whom Ojola-ibinu disparages, whom the 
rest of the creation are glorifying, that today that I am in trouble let 
this sand change and become poisonous ants, and let them begin to 
bite these snakes.
After he had said this, the sand truly changed and became ants, 
and they started biting those snakes. As the ants were biting the 
snakes, the snakes wanted to bit them, too, and whenever they did 
that, they were biting themselves. By so doing every one of those 
snakes began to kill one another; their very own poison gripped them. 
By doing so, they killed one another completely; thus did we do and 
we were victorious over them. After we had done this, we went back 
138






to enter into the palace; we brought food out, and we began to eat.
. "But before we did this, Enia-se-pele and I went to see Ojola-ibinu 
where he was lying dead, and when we looked into his guts, we found 
two gourdlets: one was (made) of gold, the second one was of silver. 
When I turned mine (which was made of gold) upside down, gold 
money began to come out, but Enia-se-pele took that of silver and 
turned it upside down; money — shillings —38 began to come out. 
These monies'were coming out forever; they did not stop; with this, I 
became a wealthy man, even though a thief stole the gourdlet at last.
"All of us ate very much at Ojola-ibinu's palace; we also drank 
liquor as well. Ijambaforiti was completely drunk. When it was in the 
evening all of us tied our luggage, andwe put them on the heads 
of those who were a little smaller among us, for we had increased a 
little more (in number) than the time we left Baba-Onirungbon- 
yeukes' house. Those that we met at the courtyard of the king of the 
snakes, those who had not died,joined us.
 Ijambaforiti was the one who was in the front, and we were also 
following him, along. We left the town with dicing, and it was 
Ijambaforiti who was (the vocalist) leading the song, and it was his 
own name with which he was singing the song. He said we should be 
saying Ijamba while he would be saying Foriti. As he was taking
his steps one after the other, all of us were taking our steps in unison, 
and we were clapping our hands. Thus everything became 'Foriti- 
Ijamba-Foriti-Ijamba-Foriti-Ijamba and so on and so forth.' Thus we 
did, and we left the town of those snakes, where Ojola-ibinu was 
reigning as their king.
"It was not too long after we left the town, when it was night, and 
it was on the way that we slept till dawn. Throughout the night of that 
day, we did not reach any town at all, but when it was the noon time 
of the third day, we came to the place where those seven were, and 
they were running around all their lives. In the beginning, at the very 
inception of the universe, when Satan fell in heaven, and God put a 
line of demarcation mid-way between good heaven and bad 
heaven, there was a tree at the edge of the chasm without a bottom 
which was a demarcator between good heaven and bad heaven. All 
the people in heaven used to call the tree Temi-nikan. This tree had 
various fruits, and its fruits were very beautiful indeed, but no one 
ever touched it, for whoever touched it would experience trouble; 
whoever plucked Temi-nikan fruits would meet with God's anger. 
But those disobedient women behave in the way which God disliked; 
they left where God the (heavenly) King had put them in heaven; they 
went to pluck Temi-nikan's fruits. And after they had plucked them, 
they came into the world, and they gave them to the children of men 
to eat. Since then, the children of men have been behaving 
hypocritically to one another: one does not want the other to have 
progress like himself, and they were shouting each other's (name)
139

around the world. But a sinner will not go unpunished, except if 
the sinner repents. Because those women were hard-headed (women), 
God the (heavenly) King cursed them, and He said in His anger, 'You 
disobedient creatures, I created you, and you have forgotten me. You  
went and gave my people the fruits of Teemi-nikan to eat, thus you 
turned their lives to bitterness! Go; you must not return to heaven 
any more. Go to the forest over there; continue to run around for the rest 
of your lives. Be a lesson to the disobedient children and an 
enlightenment to those with deaf ears, and you will never get out of this 
sorrowful condition in which you are now, until the day when all things 
would be changed.'
"Thus God the (heavenly) King had cursed these seven women 
because they did not care about the One who created them. Before we 
left Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's place, he had told us a lot about them, 
and he had commanded us to cover our ears with cloth whenever we 
were getting near them, and that when we came to their place, we 
must not look at the direction where they were: they were on the 
left-hand side, where they were singing bad songs, the type of which, 
when the ears hear them, the eyes would want to look in that direction, 
and he who sees them would not be able to go any more. Baba- 
Onirungbon-yeuke had told us that whenever we got to a jungle that 
was deeply dark, where not even one bird cried, where lizards did not 
run (around), where no squirrel climbed the trees, where we did not 
see the trail of the animals, we should know  that we had come to the 
vicious-headed women's place, and that we should cover our ears 
with cloth until we came to a place  that was very flat. He also told us 
that when we came to their place, we would be in a panic, and the hair 
on our head would stand up. When he had finished his speech, he 
said, 'Whenever you begin to see these sings, be ready to run away.
"Truly when we were about to get there, we began to see those 
things; at the same time, all of us had covered our ears with cloth; we 
were going. Thus did we do until we went through the valley. But 
after we had gone through it, we looked into our midst, and we did 
not see one of us any more. The man was the one whose name was 
Ibanuje-isale who was a fellow whose face was never inviting at 
any day; he used to tighten his mouth tightly around. We waited for 
a long time; we did not see Ibanuje-isale, and we did not know how 
he walked in the valley. We blew a whistle, he did not respond; we 
shouted for a long time, we did not see him up till this very day. Some 
people said that when we got to these women's place; the man looked 
where they were, and he turned to their place; some people said that 
he had gone (to another way) before we got there, and that he was lost 
in the forest. But everybody was just saying his own (opinion), what 
we were sure of was that we and Ibanujisale left Ojola-ibinu's town 
together, and we and Ibanuje-isale did not go through the valley of 
the vicious-headed women.
140

"When we left this valley, we met a gnome who was coming from 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's place. The gnome had only one eye. We 
greeted each other very well when we met each other, for at that time, 
we were not very much afraid of the gnomes any more: we were just 
meeting each other, and we were parting with each other; we were 
talking together, and we were making jokes together, and we were 
deliberating with one another; we almost became gnomes ourselves.
'It was the one-eyed gnome that gave the letter that was written to 
me by Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke. This was what was in the letter:
"Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's house. 
He who lived on the hillock of the rock. 
Care of the one-eyed gnome the 
Vicinity of the house of death, 
Midway between earth and heaven. 
The eighth day of the sixth month. 
Nineteen hundred and forty-four 
After the death of Our Lord.
"To,
Mr. Olowo-aiye, the son of Akowediran,
My dear Olowo-aiye,
"Since you left our place, I have not ceased to be anxious about you, 
and I presume that before this letter gets into your hand, you must 
have left the town of the snakes, and you must have passed those 
vicious-headed women.
"Without any doubt, you must have met with all kinds of trouble, 
but I think you would not forget all the pieces of advice that I was 
giving you when you were with me, that before you were victorious 
in life, there were seven important things that you must do. First, you 
must trust in God the (heavenly) King, and make God your charm 
whom you should invoke in the morning; second, you must deal with 
people with internal truth; we must not find you in the act of 
malevolence; where you tell one thing to a fellow over there, and 
begin to carry the load of conspiracy around; third; you must 
humble yourself: it is the sin of pride, of all the sins which the children 
of men commit on earth that exasperates God the most. When the Son 
of God came to the world the other day, he came with humility; he 
was conceived in a little town; he was born in the place where animals 
were eating; he scolded the proud ones, and he washed the feet of his 
disciples; fourth, be very active in your work; do not be slow; progress 
is far from a lazy person; he who sleeps on the bed all day will not be 
able to stand in the midst of the important people forever; fifth, always 
be patient with the children of the world, for if you do not do that, you 
would be stupid like them; sixth, do not expect, for the rest of your 
life, that the more you do good to the children of the world, the more
141

you would receive gratitude from their hands. Only few of the 
children of men appreciate the good deeds done to them; most of them 
are ingrates; he who does good deeds makes God happy, and this is 
why people have not been angry in a day and stopped doing good 
deeds;besides, no one knows who would repay the act of goodness; 
the person that you think would appreciate a good deed may not 
appreciate it;the person whom you do not expect such a thing from 
might be the one who would appreciate the good deed which you 
might have done to him, and might be spreading good news about 
you around; seventh, do not be selfish, you are not the only one in the
world; always help your neighbour.
"My dear Olowo-aiye, I thank you for the little time we lived 
together, and I am grateful for the money you spent for the people in 
my home, when you were going (away). 
I put you under the protection of God the (heavenly) King. 
May God assist you.
All my household greet you very well.
I am your great friend,
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke

"Thus did my friend write a letter to me; when I got this letter, it 
seemed as if I had seen him (in person). Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke was 
indeed a person. He was a person on whom one could depend; he 
was not a person whose face was sweet, like honey, but whose inside 
was like the poison of the night-adder; he was not a friend who came 
to one's house and greeted-one about fifty times a day, while he 
became the chairman where a conspiracy was being held against one.
"I also replied my friend's letter. This was the way the letter went:
On the way from Igbo Olodumare, 
The tenth day of the six month.
Nineteen hundred and forty-four 
After the death of our Lord.
"To
Mr. Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,
Who lives on the hillock of the rock.
Care of the one-eyed gnome.
The vicinity of the house of Death, 
Midway between earth and heaven.
My dear Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,
"It was during (our) journey that I got your letter. It was at the time 
that I was being saddened because I missed you, that your letter came 
to my hand. When I read the letter, it seemed as if I saw you (in 
person). Since the day I left there, there had never been a day when I 
had not remembered you, I missed you a lot of times; I dreamt of 
seeing you several times.
142

"Before I continue my words, I must first thank you for your care 
over me when I was in your place, for it is God the (heavenly) King 
alone who is able to repay the good deeds that you have done for me.
What was it that I did not eat with my mouth? Was it pounded yam,
or oka or yam or maize? A dog never forgets its benefactor: I cannot 
forget you forever — you are, a person (indeed) — Ha! Baba-Oni- 
rungbon-yeuke, thank you. Just as the Moslem remembers Anabi, 
and the Christians remember God the (heavenly) King, so I shall 
remember you forever,
I'also thank you for all the pieces of advice which you gave me; I 
have not forgotten them at all: they are in the palm of my left hand I 
have not eaten with the hand. I want you to know that a piece of 
advice is very precious; some (pieces of advice) like silver; and some 
other is like gold, yet some other is like diamond which is a precious 
stone. If men were to pay for (pieces of) advice, some would have been 
more than one thousand pounds. Therefore, he who gives one a 
piece of good advice, that one has done an important thing for the 
fellow. May God not hand us over into an enemy's hand. The advice 
of an enemy is like an itadogun's knife, but the advice of a friend 
is sweeter than honeycomb, and this is why-it behoves a gentleman to 
think before he accepts (a piece of) advice or kick against it, but you 
are my friend, you Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke, 'and your piece of advice 
has penetrated into the corner of my pate.
"I also have a piece of advice that I want to give to you, for 
something that affects you affects me as well. I had observed, when I 
was there, that your inside is whiter than carded-cotton, but I want 
you to know that insides of all the people in the world are not so. You 
must be very observant, for I am afraid of your neighbours. He who 
lives in a house in death's neighbourhood, lives in a house near 
something. He who lives in a house in disease's neighbourhood, lives 
in a house near trouble, and he who hears the heaven's rooster crow, 
must be very careful (indeed). The enemy is in the back-yard, while 
the villain lives in one's house, if the death from one's house does 
not kill one, that of the outside will not kill one either, it is a house 
maid that knows one's secret, but it is one's wife who knows the time 
one is about to sleep. Therefore, may God deliver you from the hands 
of the enemies in the house, and the enemies from the outside.
'Too much talking breeds a lie; therefore, my words will not be too
long.
"Greet your household for me.
"We are all in peace here,
If the owner of (my) life does not take it the day is coming 
when we would see ourselves with (our) eyes.
I am your friend in both eyes 
Olowo-aiye,
The Son of Akowediran
143


"Thus did I write the letter, and I gave it to the one-eyed gnome to 
give it to my friend. I will not be able to say all that my eyes saw before 
I got to the place I was at first, before I got lost into Igbo Olodumare, 
when I first left my home town. This was where the king of Igbo 
Olodumare was, when I left my wife, when I was ready to go and hunt 
— the adventure — which led me to the point where I found myself 
sitting precariously on the top of the tree, for a long time. If I have to 
tell now all that my eyes saw when I was coming back, that would 
take another whole book. But what I can say is that it was the sixth 
month that I received my friend's letter —Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's 
letter —that I got to the place where the king of Igbo Olodiunare made 
as his place of abode. We came across a host of little towns on our way, 
and the opportunities that I had in those towns were so many indeed. 
I had money upon money, I had a lot of medicines, to the extent that 
I had to look for a carrier to carry my luggage for me. But at last, I got 
to the place where the king of Igbo Olodumare was; joy met with joy; 
laughter was wedding laughter; dancing was playing with 
dancing; food was meeting food; human being and the gnomes were 
hanging their arms around one another's necks; the news filled the 
entire Igbo Olodumare.
"After the gnome and I greeted each other, and I had asked about 
my wife, he told me that my older brother had come there, and he had 
taken my wife to our town, because they did not hear from me. He 
himself told me also that my wife had delivered a baby, and that the 
name that was given to the baby was Akara-ogun.
"We spent three days in this king's palace. When I told him that I 
wanted to go home; to quickly go and see my wife and her child, he 
also agreed with me. But if it were not because of my wife,he wouldn't 
have allowed me to go, for he had told me the other time, that I should 
be living with him. The king was a (good) person indeed; there was 
nothing at all that I lacked in his place; he took care of me very well. 
He was not among those who, when God barely takes them to 
positions, they would be looking down upon others; they would 
be thinking that they are the only ones for whom the world exists, 
without knowing that even a little child often knows the place of an 
adult's fall. He who steps on a cobra's tail would experience a snake's 
fight; he who stands on the slope side of an automobile is playing with 
death. He who is grown, and does not have the attitude of an adult is 
still a child.
"Thus I left the king's place,and I came to my home town. I was 
happy when I saw my people: my wife rejoiced a lot;we played until 
the night time, and we ate a delicious meal, because I brought 
partridge as she had told me to, when I left her in the camp at Igbo 
Olodumare and went to hunt. My child had started walking very well 
before I came, my first born, Akara-ogun, and I could not tell the 
extent of my joy when I saw him.
144

Thus went my autobiography. That which I had written down 
would show my children in the future, what my eyes had seen before 
I married my wife, and that which my eyes saw after I had married 
her, before I could see with my own eyes, the child who was my first 
born.
Thus my friend's father wrote down a part of his autobiography. I
took two days to write this one part; I wrote for so long that my 
shoulders became sore. Akara-ogun, who was the son of Olowo-aiye 
was the one reading the story to me, and when he finished reading 
it, he answered; he said, 

My friend, whatever the message God sends you to deliver, 
deliver it to the children of the world; do not be weary. If people read 
your book, and by so doing, God teaches them some Wisdom, that 
means that your coming into the world benefits your neighbour. 
Please, I beg you, humility is important in behaviour: do not compare 
yourself with others who, when they have used the gift that God had
giẹen them, they would put on pride like a gown, and they would say
that they are the only ones in existence. There is no one, (who is 
sufficient except God the (heavenly) King. Remember that he who 
made the dust on the ground, who made the water, who made the air 
and made the tree, that One can use others for the redemption of 
the children of the world. Be grateful to God, the Master of glory, if
you are counted fit to help others, you, my friend. I thank you very 
much for the work which you have been doing for me all these days 
that I have been coming to you; I also observed that the work did not 
make you feel too arrogant, instead, it was humbling you. God knows 
what you are doing; he would not dare throw your gold before a dog, 
neither will he dare put your precious stone before a pig; he who 
knows how to make use of opportunity is the one whom God gives 
the opportunity. 
"May God give you a lengthy life; may God give you peace of mind;
may the Creator endow you with (good) health.
" It is time now for me to go back to the place from where I came;
if God spares (our) lives, a day is coming, when we shall see ourselves
with (our own) eyes."
Thus did the man say, and when he ended his speech, I could not 
see him anymore.
This is the matter, you our people. I believe that since you have 
been reading this book, you have not failed to extract some wisdom 
for yourselves. The elders have said that other people's wisdom does 
not allow us to ca11 an elder a fool. He who is in the world without 
understanding is like an animal that is perished. My mother used to
talk to those of us who are children when we were young and she told 
us until we were grown. She used to say, 'He who has a child, and the
child is not wise is undertaking a trade with a loss!
Do not forget that the sweeter the word is, the more its difficulties.
145


When one experiences difficulty one time, it often seems as if one 
should die immediately. If you have been coming across difficulties, 
I want you to burst into laughter and know that a day is coming, when 
enjoyment,will enter to meet you in the house. A school child who has 
not done very well in an examination today, if he is very active, a day 
is coming when he will do well, and joy will cover up the sorrow 
completely. I want all people to know that there is no one who does 
not have his own forest of God to go in the world. One's Forest of God 
is different from the other's; may God grant that every one would 
come back from his own Forest of God without being wounded. May 
God disallow the difficulty which we would not have the capacity to 
bear to confront us.
Do not forget the words which you have heard about humility. 
Pride is spreading in the world everyday, and pride is the root of 
destruction. In whatever position you are in the world, I want you to 
put on the attitude of humility like a gown. The king who is big, does 
not compare to a messenger in the hands of God the (heavenly) King. 
Do not forget to deal with people with integrity; that is, you should 
not wish for evil on your neighbour. Let your yes be yes, and your no 
be no. But righteousness is not an easy thing, for if you are not well 
prepared, it would be difficult to be righteous, for as you are trying to 
rescue some people out of the pit, the one whom you are trying to 
rescue might be trying to push you into the abyss. But if you continue 
with your integrity, the very abyss into which he wants to push you; 
is the place in which he will find himself, and he will fill it to the brim. ' 
If you use (your) integrity, God will stand by you like a great 
mountain, and he who runs against you will be wounded. Take care 
of your jobs, (for) what is important is the place where one gets one's 
morsel.
It is against the plan of God, and it is abominable in the sight of the 
children of the world, that the child whom we begat from within our 
womb, should have a careless attitude towards us. Therefore, there is 
not any kind of attitude that the school children can show which is 
more (dignifying) than the attitude of humility before the elders — 
respect for the parents and submission to the ordinance of God, the 
(heavenly) King. I want a child who knows that he is behaving in such 
a way that makes the parents angry, who frightens the teachers, who 
saddens the relatives, to resolve to forsake such attitude on the day he 
reads this book, for the sake of the future. I think it was one of the 
learned of old that had told us in a book the other day, that, 'A child 
who behaves carelessly towards his parents, an Akalamagbo bird 
would extract his eyes and eat! May God forbid an Akalamagbo bird 
to extract and eat, the eyes of our school children.
You children of men, the world is moving; every day is taking a day 
out of the days of everyone, and the days of the life of the children of men 
are very short. Whatever time we have in the world, I appeal to you, let
146

us spend it very well; let us spend it with joy; let us spend it with 
“laughter, let us cover up (our) sorrow completely with happiness 
Thus ends this story. I greet all of you for the days gone by. May 
God take care of your homes for you; may He take care of your paths 
as well. He who is looking for money, may God give him profitable 
money; he who is looking for a child, may God give him a peaceful 
child, he who is looking for a job, may God, provide a good job that 
would do him good, for him. May God, the Possessor of-the-sea-of-gifts 
help the nursing mother to take care of (her) child, may He 
provide good husband for the maid, and give the young man a 
peaceful wife. This girl who does not want to have a husband and the 
young man who does not want to have a wife, may God give them 
good lives. May He bring friendship among the rivals, may He give 
fertile soil to the farmer, and give those who do other (kinds) of work 
good jobs to do; may He give health to the sick, and give wisdom to 
the kings; may He give understanding to the chiefs, and may He give 
knowledge to the school children, and may He take care of their 
teachers; may He continue to direct the powerful ones to the path of 
the truth.
Good bye for now.
May God grant that we will continue to hear from each other.

 