






The Forest  of God
(Annotated  Translation  of 
D.O.  Fagunwa:  Igbo  Vlodumare)  
by.
Gabriel  A. Ajadi
AGBO  AREO  PUBLISHERS






© Gabriel  A. Ajadi  1984,1995
All rights reserved.  No part of this book,  may be reproduced  or 
transmitted  in any form  or by any means  without  the prior  written  
permission  of die author  or Agbo  Areo  Publishers.
Cover  design  © Agbo  Areo  Publishers  Limited
First  published  1984,1995
Published  by
AGBO  AREO  PUBLISHERS
Trusthouse,  Akinyemi  Way
S W. Ring  I^ad,  U.I, P.O.  Box 22485 l 
Ibadan.
ISBN  978 2432  63 6






This  work,  which  was  originally  a Ph.D.  dissertation  submitted  to Ball 
State  University;  Muncie,  Indiana,  USA.
is gratefully  dedicated  to
my motiier,  Estiier  Olateium  Ajadi,
my  father,  Jacob  Afolabi  Ajadi,
my  wife,  Caroline  Omotanbaje  Ajadi,
my children,  Qmobola,  Oluwafunmilola,  Oluwafunmike,  Ctyebisi  
and  Stephen  Babatunde  Ajiboye  Ajadi  Jnr.,
' and,  above  all, to
the glory  of God  and the Lord  Jesus  Christ.
iii!






Acknowledgement
Thomas  Nelson  & Sons  (Publishers,  United  Kingdom  and  Nigeria)  are 
gratefully  acknowledge  for their permission  granted,  to translate  
this work  from  its original  Yoruba  edition  into  English.
IV






Preface
Fa^wa  is now  coming  into  the limelight  in the contemporary  trend  
of African  literary  scholarship . The  major  attention  given  to his works  
comes  mainly  from the Yoruba  scholars  who are able to read and 
appreciate  Fagimwa's  artistic  skills.  Only  a few non-native  scholars,  
like Bemth  Lirtdfors,  Ulli Beier,  and  others,  have  been  able  to address  
memselves  to some  friematic  or structural  aspects  of his works  and 
they are not unaided  by either  the native  speakers  of Yoruba  or the 
limited  translations  tfiat  are  available  to them.  Thus  interested  foreign  
sciKJlars  have  been  impeded  by the linguistic  barrier  which  the native  
scholars  have  yet to remove  completely;  hence  a persistent  demand  
. . feanslation  of Fagunwa's  works  into Engli^.
It is Ae purpose  of this  translation,  therefore,  to respond  to such  an 
urgent  demand.  Thus  I decided  to set  for myself  the task  of translating  
^d  annotating  Fatwa's Olodiunaie,  s. second  volume  of his 
first novel,  Ogboju  Ode ninu Igbo Intnmole,  which  is already  
belated  by a Yoruba  scholar,  Wole Soyinka,  as The Forest  of 
A Hunter's  Saga^ published  in London  by 
Nelson  in 19^.  Both  the philosophy  and the method  of translation  
employ^  in franslatiofi  aregeared  toward  the achievement  of an
^uivalent  effecf  and to the unveiling  of the linguistic  curtain  in 
order  that  Fagunwa's  meaning  and  spirit  might  come  alive  in his own  
words  arid style  m the English  edition.  This  way,  the readership  and 
toe schola^ip  of Fagunwa's  corpus  may be widened,  and toe 
Jjonzoi^  of the gmeral  readers  in English  expanded.  With  this  hope,  
this ^hon  of Olodumare  as The Forest  of God  is sent forth  
among  toe general  readers  and toe scholars.
Gabriel  A. Ajadi  
D^artment  of Modem
European  Languages  
University  of florin  
florin
VJarflraiy  1994






Contents
vi
 Acknowledgement .............................  iv
Preface .................................................   v
Introduction  1
Part  I: Literature  Review .............. 2
Part  11: D.O.  Fagunwa:  A Brief  Biography  6
Part  HI: Fagunwa's  Works:  A General  Assessment  
of His Tlmu^t  Pattern  .;. ................... 8
Part  IV: Igbo  CHodumare  (The  RaestofGcxf)  13
Part  V: Fagunwa's  Language:  Yoruba  ..  15
Part  VI: Fagunwa's  Rhetoric, .. ...... 19
Part  VII: Note  <mi tfxe Translation  ............................  20
The Novel:  fTSe  Forest  of  Cod)  19
Bibliography .........................................................  170






Introduction
D.O. Fagunwa's  Igbo Olodumare  {The  Forest  of  God),  is a novel  about  the 
story  of Olowo-aiye's  adventure  in tine Forest  of God.  Olowo-aiye  sets out  to 
Igbo  Olodumare  (The  Forest  of God)out  of sheer  love  for an adventure  and  a 
guest  for an opportunity  to prove  himself  as a powerful  hunter  who  cannot  
be daunted  by the awe of the unknown —a basic characteristic  of the 
traditional  Yoruba  hunter.  Thus  Fagunwa,  in his characteristic  vividness  of 
imagination,  artistic  prowess,  dazzling  language,  and a com  pallin g 
■descriptive  skill, prefects  events  and episodes  around  Olowo-aiye  as he 
moves  along  onhis  journey  to, in, and from  Igbo  Olodumare.  The  events  and 
the episodes  are those  of Olowo-aiye's  struggle  with  the trolls,  gnomes,  weird  
creatures;  and  his visits  to the sage,  (Mr)  Death,  and  Miss  Disease.
After this experience-packed  sojourn  in the Forest  of God, ho finally  
returns  home,  to join his family,  and to rejoice  at the sight of his son, 
Akara-Ogun,  who is now grown.  Akara-ogun,  of course,  is the hero of 
Fagunwa's  first novel  Ogboju  Ode  ninu  Igbo  Irunmgl^  translated  by Wole  
Soyinka  as The  Forest  of a Thousand  Daemons;  A Hunter's  Saga.  ,
This  work  translates  and  annotates  D.O.  Fagunwa's  Igbo  Olodumarewiih  
a critical  introduction  which  is divided  into seven  parts.  Pa,rt  one deals  with  
file literature  review,  while  part two deals  with a brief  biography  of D.O.  
Fagunwa,  the author,  whose  Judeo-Christian  background,  his culture,  and. 
the tradition  and the world-view  of his ethnic  group  — Yoruba shape  his 
thgught  pattern  and his imagination.  These  cultural,  traditiorial  and 
philosophical  backgrdund  strongly  Inform  his work  of art.
Part  three  briefly  comments  on file thought-pattern  that  informs  his works,  
emphasizes  and explains  the nature  of Fagunwa's  dichotomized  world,  a 
concept  that  emanates  from  his cultural  and  traditional  background.  Part  four  
gives  a synopsis  of his (Fagunwa's)  Igbo  Olodumare  wifii  a brief  comment  
on the structure  and the symbolic  aspects  of the novel.
Par t five  briefly  discusses  the structure,  syn^x  and  file  tone  of file  language  
in which  Fagunwa  wrote  — Yoruba  — a linguistic  parameter  which  makes  
the attempt  of translating  Yoruba  literature  to English  a difficult  task.  As a 
corollary  to that part, part six discusses  Fagunwa's  ffietorical  prowess  as 
evident  in his esoteric  use of Yoruba,  a technique  which  saturates  his entire  
novels,  and makes  him fire master  of his mother  tongue.  Thus it is tihe 
translator's  task to adequately  convey  in English,  a nontonal  language,  the 
rhythm  and the verbal  gymnastics  Which  Fagunwa  displays,  particularly  in 
his Ig^o  Olodumare  (The  Forest  of God).
The  last  part,  part  seven,  spells  the translator's  main  objective,  philosophy,  
and  the mefiiod  of translation.  The overriding  objective,  file  note  explains/  is 
readability,  intelligibility  and  an equivalent  effect.'
Iri order  to achieve  this  end,  file translation  is annotated,  while  the idea  of 
narrative  bridge  is ventured  as’ a mechanism  which  allows  a smooth  flow  of 
filenarratives  in the translated  edition.  Furfiiermore,  the translator's  stylistic  
idiosyncrasy  is sacrificed  in order  to unveil  the author's  meanings  in his own  
words  and style.  ■. .
1






Part I: Literature  Review
Fagunwa  is now  attracting  critical  attention  in contemporary  African  literary  
scholarship.  The major  attention  given  to his works  comes.mainly  from  the 
Yoruba  scholars  who  are able  to read  and  appreciate  Fagunwa's  artistic  skills.  
Only a few nOTi-native  scholars,  like Bemth  Lindfofs,  UHi Beier  and a few 
others  have  been  able to address  themselves  to some  thematic  or structural  
aspects  of his works,  and they  are not unaided  either  by the native  speakers  
'of Yoruba  or the limited  translations  that are available  to them. Thus  
interested  foreign  scholars  have  been  impeded  by the linguistic  barrier  which  
the native  scholars  have  yet to remove  complete^.  When  this is done,  both  
the readership  and  the scholarship  of Fagunwa's  corpus  shoidd  be widened.
Thus far, only two translations  of the first short chapter  of Igbo  
Olodiunare(The  Forest  ofGod)}\sve  been  done.  One  was  by A. A. Akinwowo,  
and the other jointly  by both Bakare  Gbadamosi  and Ulli Beier.^  Wole  
Soyinka,  Africa's  foremost  novelist,  poet, playwright,  actor and stage  
director,  has translated  into  English  Fagunwa's  first  novel,  Ogboju  Ode  ninu  
Igbolrunmgleas  The  Forest  of a Thousand  Daemoi^s:  A Hunter's  Sa^,  which  
was published  by Nelstm  in London  in 1968.  These  limited  translations  are 
the cmly  material  with  which  the non-Yoruba  scholars  can work.  Therefore,  
there  is an urgent  need  for more  translations  that  'would  respect  flie intention  
and fee spirit  and the style  of the author.  In a way of critical  analysis  of his 
works,  there  have been articles  addressing  selected  friemes  in Fagunwa's  
works,  but frid most definitive  and comprehensive  wcrk  finis  'far is Ayo 
Bamgbose's  The Novels  of D.O. Fagunwa).  Benin  City:  Efiuope  Publishing  
Corporation,  1973.
Bamgbose  aptly  describes  Fagunwa  as:
... a pioneer  in the  field  of creative  writing  in Yoruba.  Before  him  no other  
writer  has  had  the  same  impacton  the Yoruba  literary  scene,  nor  file same  
influence  on subsequent  Writers.  The  appearance  of his uavA,Ogbcyu  Ode  
ninu Igbo  Irunmole  makes  an imporfimt  stage  ip file development  of 
Yoruba  written  language.^
Bam^ose  follows  this  thesis  through  in  his  book  by bringing  out  clearly  vfiiat  
is traditional  in terms  of what  is distinctively  Yoruba  in Fagunwa's  works:  
'The setting  of Fagunwa's  novels,'  he ma&itains,  'is Yoruba  country  and 
culture';^  this culture,  of coyrse  is not 'static',  but dynamic.*  He identifies  
Fagunwa's  sources  as: '(a) Yoruba  folktales,  (b) literary  works  in English  
including  translations,  which  must  have  fonned  part of fire background  of 
educated  Nigerians  of  Fagunwa's  time,  and  (c) Christian  religious  literature.'^  
Following  the lead set by L. Murby  in his famous  editor's  foreword  to (he 
1950  edition  of Fagunwa's  O^oju  Ode ninulgboIrunmole,  Bamgbose  goes  
as far as identifying  the dassictJ  literature  whidi  constitutes  another  
dimensian  of effect to Fagunwa's  literary  ingredients,  notably  'Homer's  
Oc^ss^and  Greek  myths,'  as well  as a 'minor  influence  ci Aesop's  Fables/  
and  (he ancient  Arabian  Nig^tsf'
Becarise  of fiiese  sources,  Bamgbose  maintains  fiiat  Fagunwa's  works  are 
not original.  However,  he maintains  fiiat  '(he  only  aspect  of file treatment  of 
2






the material  which  is distinctively  Fagunwa  is the w^y.he  re-teUs  the stories  
in his own  words,  sometimes  elaborating  them  by thd  inclusion  of dialogue.'  
In this  sense,  Fagunwa's  works  fall  in the  category  of what  TS.  Eliot  describes  
as originality:
Our  tendency  to insist;  when  we praise  a poet,  upon  those  aspects  Of his 
work  in which  he least  resembles  any ohe else. fa these  aspects  or parts  
of his work  we pretend  to find whatiis-individual,  what  is the peculiar  
essence  of the man.  We dwell  with  satisfaction  upop  a poet's  difference  
from his predecessors;  we endeavour  to find somefiiing  that can be 
isolated  fa order  to bp enjoyed.  Whereas  if we approach  a poet  -without  
this  prejudice  we shall  find  that  not  only  the  best,  but  the most  individual  
parts  of his work  may  be those  in which  the dead  poets,  his ancestors,  
assert  their  immortality  more  vigorously.^
Judged  on this basis,  Fagunfwa  is most  original  even  in the way  he makes  use 
of the material  he imports  fend employs  in his works.
Bamgbose  discusses  the major  themes  and motifs  of Fagunwa's  novels.  
They include:  'perseverance,'  'treachery',  'retribution',  'women'  'man  and 
other  creatures'  and 'love'  He does not forget  Fagunwa's  propensity  to be 
didactic,  thus  he devotes  a whole  chapter  to tiiis. In the main,  Bamgbose's  
book  gives  a surgical  approach  to the novels  of D.O. Fagunwa.  In the last 
analysis,  he comments  on Fagunwa's  love for words,  for 'in his use of 
language,  Fagunwa  shows  an incredible  feeling  for words  and their  effects,'®  
and that is why,  'in spite  of modem  criticisms  of Fagunwa's  novels  as 'mere  
fantasies,'  many  people  continue ^0 read  them  with  delict.' ’
Other  scholars  of Fagtawa's'  works  include  A. Olubumo,  who simply  
gives the synopsis  of all the novels,  and faults  him for 'inability  to create  
character'  and 'improbability  of plot>'^bpt  conclude  by  saying  that  'Fagunwa  
may be described  as a writer  of atjj^ture  stories  which  lire partly  realistic  
and partly  fantastic.  And  I think'  thaf^e  mpst  admit  that  he doefe  this quite  
brilliantly,  one of his strongest  points  b>ing  hjsgfaiius  for vivid  description,  
and his power  to create  an atmosphere.''®*feowing  FagunWa  and his 
audience,  Olubumo  aptly  says that Fagunwa's  didacticism  does  not bother  
his audience,  for they  even  'expect  it.'”
Ulli Beier,  a German  scholar,  faults  Fagunwa  for his 'plot  is a rambling  
somewhat  disorganized  fairy tale. It is a sucgesrion  of adventures  loosely  
strung  together, ”^ but he commends  him fSt his 'shrewd  and detailed  
observation  of everyday  life that goes on around  himj'^®  for 'as an observer  
of Yoruba  mind  at work  Fagunwa  is still unsurpassed.'^*-
Critics  fault  him  for lack  of realistic  plot,  but they  should  bear  in mind  that 
'Fagunwa  does  not attempt  to solve  any problems  in his books.  He has two 
simple  aims  as a writer:  he tries  to delict  and to entertain:  he also tries,  alas,  
to instruct  and improve  his reader.  But  he succeeds  so excellently  well  in his 
first  aim, that  we willingly  forgive  han file second.'^®
Abiola  Irele's  article  is considered  file most  well-written  and one of the 
most scholarly  articles  that have thus.far  been written  on the three  
outstanding  traditional  writers:  D.O. Fagunwa,  Amos  Tutuola,  and Wole  
Soyin^.  He provides  an analysis  of file drift  in fte trend  of literary  creation  
in Africa;  thus  he maintains  that
the essential  direction  of modem  Afiican  -writing,  of  the work  of  the  truly  
significant  writers,  is towards  the definition,  in and through  literature,  of 
an imaginative  apprehension  and embodiment  of an African  spirit.^®
3






While  this is true of other  African  writers,
in no other  area of Africa  is the current  along  which  tfiis elaboration  in 
literatureof  a continuous  stream  of the collective  consciousness  from  the 
traditional  to the modem  so clearly  evident,  and so well  marked  out, as 
' in Yorubaland
Thus  these  writers,  each  in his own  unique  way,  expresses  his aesthetic  vision  
through  the artistic  expression  which  emanates  from a common  stock of 
tradition:  Yoruba  mythology,  cosmology  and  the collective  apprehension  of 
the universe.  Thus coftceming  Fagunwa's  artistic  recapitulation-and  the 
interpretation  of the tradition  from  which  his work  evolves,  Irele  comments  
that:
the significance  of his work  is thus  inherent  in the symbolic  framework
'' and connotations  of his novels.  A simple  but valid  interpretation  of tfie 
patten)  of situation  in his novels  suggests  that his forest  stands  for the 
universe,  inhabited  by obscure  farces  to which  man  stands  in a dynamic  
mqral  and spiritual  rdationship  and with  which  his destiny  is involved;  
in short,  a mythical  representation  of the existential  condition  of man  as 
expressed  in Yoruba  thinking.^®
With Fagunwa  begins  an enduring  literary  tradition  through  which  the 
content  of the traditi^  and culture  which  shape  his work is artistically  
expressed.
Therefore,  Tutuola,  though  writing  in English  — the choice  of language  
which  had for a long  time  until  recently  clouded  his literary  achievement  in 
Nigeria  — follows  in the literary  traction  of which  D. O. Fagunwa  Is a 
forerunner,  for 'it is cle^  that Fagunwa  ... provided  not only the original  
inspiration  but indeed  a good  measure  of the material  for Tutuola's  novel.  
The echo^  df Fagunwa  in Tutuola's  work  are numerous  enou^  to indicate  
that the latter  was creating  from  a model  provided  by the fermer.'^^  Tutuola,  
however,  lhaintains  his distinctive  identity  through  his 'visionary  powers',  for
... Where  Fagunwa  achieves  a personal  reorganisation  of the traditional  
material,  and is thus able to put his stamp  on this material  in his own  
writings  — aided  especially  by the gift  of Imguage  — one  feels  that  with  
Tutuola,  there is a total reliving  of the coUe^ve  myth within  tire 
individual  consciousness.  The artist is here at the very centre  of his 
material  and of the experience  that  it communicates.^*^
In other  words,  while  Fagunwa  distances  himself  from  the  artistic  articulation  
of tire common  content  of the tradition  which  underlies  their literary  art, 
Tutuola  enters  and participates  in the aesthetic  expression  of tire content  of 
that  same  tradition  which  Irele  labels  as tire 'Collective  mytir'.^^
While  Fagunwa  and Tutuola  are closer  to what  Irele  calls  the 'well-springs  
of tire culture',  Wole  Soyinka's  work  does  not  have  such  a direct  connection,  
for 'tire elements  of tire traditional  system  are integrated  into tire writer's  
vision  through  tire mediation  of a highly  coirscious  art'^  —  highly  conscious  
in tire sense  that  tire traditicmal  elements  have  been  filtered  through  a mind  
that is completely  saturated  with tire ncxr-African  literary  tradition.  This  is 
what  Irele explains  furtirer  as he maintains,  'tiris means  tirat in tire,  case of 
Soyinka,  the relationship  of tire work  to tire communal  spirit  passes  titrough  
a process  of personal  rediscovery  of traditional  values  and tire progressive  
approximation  of tire individual  artistic  personality  to tire determiiration  of 
4






?
(
Jcollective  consciousness.'^
In spite  of his distinction,  the three  writers  are related,  for their  art bears  
the emblems  of the common  Yoruba  world-view  and tradition.  Tutuola  is , 
considered  'the spiritual  heir  of Fagunwa'  while  Soyinka  is recognized  a s the 
'spiritual  brother  of Tutuola'.*
Tutuola,  as we  have  already,  seen,  is quite  close  to Fagunwa  in that  Tutuola  
echoes  Fagunwa  in very  many  ways,  but  Soyinka  maintains  his individuality  
very strongly,  with the exception  of his: A Dance  in the Forest,  where  the 
symbolic  setting  of the dramatic  action  is the same  as in Fagunwa's  novels,  
and where  the figure  of the 'half-child'  may have been taken over from  
Tutuola's  Palm  Wine  Diinkard.  ’Distinctively,  therefore,  what  Sets Soyinka  
apart  from  the other  two writers,  Fagunwa  and Tutuola,  'proceeds  from  a 
developed  awareness  of the multiple  meanings  that  his art achieves.  There  is 
not only an intuitive  participation  of the artist  in his own symbols,-but  an 
intellectual  direction  given  to them,  as a means  of an integrated  and  conscious  
artistic  statement.'^'*
In a clear  but complex  fashion,  Irele  is able  to sustain  his theses  that
- the artistic  experience  of the three  writers,  taken  together,  represents  a 
development  of die common  stock  of images  in a way  that  is not only  a 
restatement  of their significance  in the context  of the traditional  
experience,  but  also  of their  continuing  truth  for modem  man.  Their  work  
expresses  the essence  of myth  as a comprehensive  metaphor  of life: as a 
reformulation  of experience  at the level of image  and symbol  so as to 
endow  it with  an intense  spiritual  significance."
In the last analysis,  Irele's  article  unveils  the significance  of these  writers  
as eloquent  articulators  of the African  mode  pf thought  and sensibility;  that 
they stand  as the 'embodiment  of an African  spirit'  and their  work  becomes  
a pointer  to the Africans'  mode  of apprehension  of reality.
Olabimtan^®  helps  us to see why religion^  themes  permeate  Fagunwa's  
novels:  'he shows,  through  Fagunwa's  family  history  that  his father  (who  later  
became  Joshua)  was formerly  known  as Asungaga  Beyioku  when  he .was  an 
Ifa priest,  but after his conversion,  he became  the baba ijo ('Father  of the 
Congregation')  of St. Luke's  Church,  Oke Igbo.'^®
Olabimtan  argues  that  'in the traditional  Yoruba  society  the  conviction  that 
religion  is a serious  concern  is one of the greatest  forces.  Every  activity  is 
linked  with  religion.  Morality  and  religion  are inseparable,  and  the great  part 
of children's  education  is rooted  in religious  observances.'^^  Thus  we are able 
to understand  the  basis  of Fagunwa's  excessive  moralization  and  his cohstant  
allusion  to the Bible.  With  a meticulous  search  for religious  ideas,  Olabimtan  
is able to identify  the aspects  of Yoruba  traditional  religion  in the hovels  of 
Fagunwa.  These  examples  are too numerous  to be listed  here.  It is sufficient  
to point  out that  Fagunwa,  coming  out of his religious  milieu,  demonstrates  
in ids works  of art that  God  is the God  of all creations,  and  that 'he takes  God  
as the central,  all governing  source  and  measure  of morality.'®°
5






Part II: Fagunwa:  A Brief  Biography
Daniel  Orowole  Fagunwa  was  bom  in Oke-Igbo  in what  wad  then  Western  
Nigeria,  in the year 1903?^  His parents,  Joshua  Akintunde  and Rachael  
Osunyomi,  were  converts  to the Judeo-Christian  religian.  Therefore,  it is not 
amiss  to postulate  the idea  that  he became  a Christian  too,  as a result  of both  
parental  influence  and  the missionary  impact  on his life. His conversion,  no 
doubt,  led him  to reject  his middle  name  Orowole  which  means  'Oro  enters  
houM'.32  He thus assumed  the name Olorunfemi  {God loves me) ’ as a 
substitute.
Fagunwa  attended  St. Luke's  Day School  at Ok^Igbo,  his home  town,  
from  1916  to 1924.  After  his elemental  education,  he became  a pupil  teacher  
in the same  school  in the following  year (1924).  His teaching  career  as an 
'untrained  pupil  teacher'  lasted  only  for a year.  In 1926,  he entered  the then  
famous  St. Andrew's  College,  Oyo.  He was tjhere  for flwee  years  (1926-29).  
After  his training,  he was  posted  to be in charge  of the Nursery  Section  of the 
same  St. Andrew's  Practising  School.  He served  in this  capacity  for nine  years  
(from  1930-1939).
Fagunwa  met his wife at Modakeke  in the year 1931.  After  a romantic  
courtship  during  which  letters  were  reciprocated  for about  six years  ,they  
were  married  in 1937.  Thus  Rebecca  became  Daniel  Olorunfemi  Fagunwa's  
companion  until  they  were  parted  by death  in 1963.
Fagunwa's  father  died  in 1939,  an experience  which  he skilfully  weaves  
into the fabric  of his narrative  in his Igbo  Olodumare:
emi rqra  joko  ni temi,  ti mo nwo  cqu aiye,  ti mo nxonu  nipa  awon  
omo  enia,  nitoii  oniruru  enia  ni motiba  gbe  po ri. Akoko  ighati  mo  nsqto  
yi, akoko  pataki  ni o je ni igbesi  aiye  mi, niton  igbana  ni baba  mi pa oju 
de, ti o rekoja  oke  cxlo,  ti o Id aiye  pe o digbose,  ti akuko  ko lehin  cdcunrin  
(p.2).
meaning:
Thus  was I, sitting  down  quietly,  looking  at the eyes of life and  musing  
about  the children  of men,  for I have  lived  with  various  kinds  d people.  
The  time  to which  I am now  referring  was a crucial  period  in my  life,  for 
it was at that  time  that  my father  shut  his eyes,  crossed  to flte other  side 
of rite river, and bade the world  gcxxlbye,  and the cock crew in his 
absence.
It was  shortly  after  his father's  death  ftrat  Fagunwa  was  transferred  from  Oyo  
to Owo  to continue  his teaching  career  in St. Patrick's  School.  He tau^t  there  
from  1940  to 1942.  Between  1943  and 1946,  he moved  from  one school  to the 
other:  CMS  Grammar  School  Lagos,  in 1943;  in 1944,  he taugjtf A*® Giris'  
School  in Benin,  and  was  at Igbobi  College,  Lagos  (when  Igbobi  was  at Ibadan  
because  of the ongoing  World  War  H, before  flte school  was moved  back  to 
Lagos  in 1946)  from  1W5-1956.
Fagunwa  won  a British  Council  scholarship,  and  left  Nigeria  for Britain  in 
1946.  On his return  from London  in 1948,  he was assigned  to teach  at the 
Government  Teacher  Training  Centre  in Ibadan;  from  1948  to 1950.  In 1950,  
6






he went  back  to Britain  to study,  but he was not able to complete  his degree  
course  before  he was invited  back  to tlje country  to become  an Education  
Officer  in 1955.  He held this position  (the position  which  was in the area of 
the publications)  for four  years,  1955-1969.  At the time,  he had  bron  noted  as 
a literary  figure  who  was interested  in his mother  tongue,  Yoruba,  so much  
that he employed  it in a 'graver  subject'  like Milton.  He had published  his 
Ogboiu  Odenintt  Igbo  InmmgleyA  1939,  and his Igbo  Olodumare  in 1946,  
and tney  Were  both  Reprinted  in 1949  and 1950  respectively.
'-Fagunwa's  literary  skill  won  him  the Margaret  Wrong  Prize  in 1955  and  a 
chieftancy  title wHch  was conferred  on him at his home  town,  Oke-Igbo,  in 
1956.  Three  yearsTater,  he was awarded  an M.B.E.  title in 1959.  Before  his 
death,  he had been  Working  with  the Heinemann  Educational  Books  Ltd as 
a Representative  in Nigeria.  He had travelled  to the Northern  Nigeria  to 
collect  some  material  for his novel  Which  he was writing,  as was rumoured  
around,  when,  on his way  back,  he fell into  the River.  Niger  at Baro,  as he was 
waiting  to be ferried  across  the  river,  and  was  drowned  on 7th  December  1963.
7






Part III: Fagunwa^s  Works
D.O. Fagunwa  was a respected  educator  who stood  for the best in terms  of 
training  the younger  generation,  uplifting  and disseminating  the ideals  of his 
country  and  his Yoruba  culture . He saw  literary  art as the  best  means  thrdugh  
which  he could  insulate  the values  of the cultural  heritage  of the Yoruba  
people  upon  the  younger  generation  specifically,  and  of making  the tradition  
and the culture  known  to all  "the people?  who  (either  through  the rendering  
of his works  into  English  and others  tongues^®  or by any othw  means  such  as 
movies)®'^  might  come  in contact  with  his novels,  thereby  sharing  the wealth  
of his imagination  and literary  craftsmanship.  He first demonstrated  his 
versatility,  remarkable  genius  and  productivity  when  he wrote  his first  novel  
for a creative  writing  contest,  the contest  which  he won creditably,  as 
Bamgbose  notes  that
Fagunwa's  first  novel  Ogboju  Ode  ninu  Igbo  Inmmole  was  written  for a 
competition  organized  by Miss  Plumber  in 1936.  The  Church  Missionary  
Society  bought  the manuscript  for £20 (twenty  pounds  sterling)  and 
published  it in 1938. The book was an instant  success,  and was very ■ 
popular  especially  in the schools.®®
The above  excerpt  about  the history  of Fagunwa's  Ogboju  Ode  Ninu  Igbo  
Iruninole  is another  due, apart  from the moralistic  nature  of the Yoruba  
folklore,  to his propensity  to overload  his narratives  with excessive  
-didacticism,  a trait for which  he is faulted  by some  of his critics.®®  Within  a 
very  short  time  in Fagunwa's  literary  career,  he had five major  novels  and 
other  publications  to his credit.  His five major  novels  indude:  Ogboju  Ode 
ninu  IgJ>o  Irunmgle  Nelson,  1950 (first published  by the CMS Bookshop,  
Lagos,  1938);  Jgbo Olodumare,  Edinburg:  Nelson,  194^  Ireke Onibudc^  
Edinburgh:  I^elson,  1954; Adiitu  Olodunuue,  Edinburg:  Nelson  1961;  
Irinkerindo  ninu  Igbo  Elegbeje,  Edinburg:  Nelson,  1964.
The significance  of Fagunwa's  work  lies not only in his literary  prowess  
and  his vividness  of imagination  alone,  but in his basic  thought  pattern,  the 
thought  pattern  which  is immersed  in the tradition  and  culture  of his Yoruba  
ethnic  group.  It is in this  philosophical  dimension  that  he is able  to transcend  
the limitation  of his culture"and  his traditional  heritage,  in order to 
universalize  the scope  of his aesthetics.  Therefore,  it is not amiss  to briefly  
examine  this fiiou^t  pattern  in order  to determine  the way he uses it to 
transcend  his culttue.
Whatever  imported  material  Fagunwa  Weaves  into the total  fabric  of his 
narratives  (for according  to Bamgbose's  clo?e  analyses  of Fagunwa's  novels,  
he draws from three major sources:  'Classical  Greek  Literature,  English  
Literature,  and the Arabian  Nights')®^  Fagunwa's  thought  pattern  is 
’’grounded  in his own  world-view,  the world-view  which  is also  informed  by 
his culture  and tradition.  To him, the nature  of reality  is not limited  to the’ 
objective  perception  of what is real alone,  but it extends  to that which  is 
subjective  as well. Therefore,  Fagunwa's  world  is dichotomized:  there is a 
world  in which  we live and move,  and there  is a world  which  we cannot  see. 
The  former  world  is the world  of man,  and  the latter  is the world  of'the  spirits.
8






sznomes,  trolls, fairies,  ghosts,  ghommids  and kobolds  These  beings  are 
perceived  as being  in competition  with  man;  they  claim  to be superior  to m^  
Ld man  in turn tries to claim  his primary  place  in the umv«se;  man  is the 
apex  of God's  cieaticm;  the most  superior  who  is the head  of all the coated  
bSias.  The claim  by the inhabitants  of both  worlds  is the cause  of the tension  
fhat^sts  between'tiie  two worlds,  for Fagunwa  believes  that the invisible  
world  is as real as the visible  world. ...  .■ i u,;-This  is basicaUy  Yoruba  cosmology,  and it is interesting  to note that this 
concept  is in consonance  with  the world-view  of the early  Chnsti^  u^e  
third  Ltury  of the Christian  era. They  thought  that  flie 
were  outside  the circle  of the believers,  were  in a world  which  was  dominated  
by the Devil  afid  his angels,  and for man  to be delivered  from  such  a vicious  
and diabolic  world,  he had to submit  himself  to the rite of baptism,  aii 
initiation  intd the kingdom  of Christ.  It is also in line 
a. brand!  of psychology  known  as transpersonal^psydiology.
not open-h^dedly  accepted  in Western  world,  especially  in the United  
Statesdt  is a valid,  but  non-objective  truth.  Its import  is s^tomic^:  it is closely  
related  to the brain  structure,  i.e. left and right  henuspheres  of theLhrain.
The neurologists'have  been  trying  to decipher  the furichims  oi the bram  
for a long time without  any absolute  and complete  understand^  of the 
functions  of the human  brain.  In recent  years,  howev«,  the question  of the 
specialized  functions  of the two halves  of the bram  has 
r^urologist,  David  Galin,  for example,  analyses  the way m whi J the two 
hemispSres  of thebrain  function.  The  brainischyided  mto  tw^left^dn^t  
hemispheres;  'each  half  excelling  in certain  abilities  m which  the other  is not 
as skilled.'^ ’ Given  this kind  of dichotomy  of the bram,  man  is th^  able to 
perceive  reality  in different  ways  op the basis  of the dom^e  of either  of 
die two  brains  in his physiological  function.  Galm  asserts  that.
In most  of us, the  right  half  of the brain,  which  control  the left  had  of the 
body,  sees  things  more  as a whple;  the left half,  ;"hichcoiitrols  *e n^t  
half  of the  body,  analyse  things  into  tiior  parts,  ^us  the  nght  half  of the 
brain  is better  at jobs like recognizing  faces,  while  the left had ex^s  m 
rational,  logical  tasks  such as mathematics  and wnhng.^ch  mode  of 
handling  information  complements  the other;  the left hemisph^  
rationally  analyzes  a problem,  the right  intuits  ttie patto  that  can solve  
it. The differences  in functions  between  the hemisph«es  are not 
ail-or-none;  in actuality  the dominance  of one or the other  in any given  
mental  task  is only  relative. - "jj
There  is a relationship  between  the brain  and the n^d,  but ho.w they are 
related  is yet  to be deciphered  by the physicists  and feeHowever,  it is believed  that  the ri^t  hemisphere  is very  go^  at deali^  
wifl! novel  complex  spatial  and musical  patterns,  ... and the left witii
a /50
Onlttie  basis of this ^chotomy,  therefore,  it is not difficult  to see^  rdSX  of suiJianidSo^whid!holds  that  since  ttiei^th^p^  of 
brain  is intuitive  and  holistic  in its function,  and  that  fte  left is 
rational,  and that ttie Western  World  is tedmologically  ac^anced,  
Eastern  world  is more mystical,  philosophical,  
intuitive,  then  the Western  mode  of fliou^t  must  be dominated  by the 
hemisphere  of the brain.  Transpersonal  psychology  holds  ttiat man  is mew  
than what  biological  arid physiological  sciences  can verify  about  him. he
9






extends  beyond  himself,  and,  he can perceive  a world  other  than  that  which  
is open  to him.  He does  not  have  to objectify  that other  world,  yet it is (in its 
subjectivity),  as real as the objective  and verifiable  world.  This concept  
appeals  to the people  who  think  in the right  hemispheric  mode.  Conversely,  
it is not acceptable  and it is even  absurd  to the people  who  think  in the left 
hemispheric  mode.  Op the basis  of Fagunwa's  world-view,  based  upon  fine 
Yoruba  concept  of world  order,  it is logical  to conclude  that  the  Yoruba  people  
think  in the former  mode  of thought,  i.e. in fire right  mode  of though
Therefore,  Fagunwa's  use of forest  as setting  for most  of his novels,  viz. 
The  Forest  of a Thousand  Daemons,  The  Forest  of God,  and The Wandering  
To and Fro in the Forest  of Elegbeje,  is obviously  archetypal  as well as 
metaphorical.  In this symbolic  forest,  man  is always  at war with  the beings  
that  inhabit  the forest . This  kind  of confrontations  between  man  and  the weird  
creatures  that inhabit  the forest are too numerous  in the novels  to be 
completely  adumbrated.  However,  one or two instances  can be drawn  from
Olodumare  (The Forest  of God);  the event that ’ takes place when  
Olowo-aiye,  the narrator  (Akara-Ogun)'s  father  decides  to enter  the forest  of 
God, ^d the gate-keeper,  Esu-kekere-ode  (an-outcast-little-devil),  tries to 
stop  him.  This creature,  Esu-kekere-ode,  is both  brave  and powerful;  he has 
the luxury  of diabolic  means  in his possession.  Because  of this supernatural  
power,  he challenges  Olowo-aiye  as he (the latter)  tries  to enter  the forest  of 
God;  he asks;
Tani o? Kini o? KUo jamo?  Kilo  jasi? Kilo  nwa?  Kilo nfe? Kil'o  nri? Kil'o  
nro?  Kini  se o? Nibo  1' o mbo?  Nibo  1' o nre?  Nibo  I'o ngb ’e? Nibo  T o nrin?  
— Da mi lohun!  Qmo  enia  da ni lohun  ni gbolohun  kan (p. 14).
meaning:
Who  are you?  What  are you?  What  do you amount  to? What  have  you 
become?  What  are you  up to? What  do you  want?  What  are you  looking?  
What  are you seeing?  What  are you thinking?  What's  toe matter  with  
you?  From  where  are you coming?  Where  are you  walking?  Answer  me! 
The  Son of man,  answer  me in a sentence.
In a stem  rejoinder,  Olowo-aiye  makes  it clear  to the gnome  that  man  is the 
head of all the created  beings  in the world;  he says this in a lan^age  that 
echoes  the story  of creation  in tile Bible;
... Ehora  ti obafi  oju dimi  yiomati  orun  de orunni,  emi okunrin  ni mo 
wi be, oni ni ng o so fun enyin  ebora  Igbo  Oiodumare  pe, nigbati  ^l^da  
da ohun  gbogbo  ti nbe  ninu  aiye  tan, o fi enia  m olori  gbogbo  won.  Mo fe 
ki iwo n«) loni  pe igbega  ni ibo-e  iparun,  on ni ibo^  isubu,  o lodi  si ofin 
enia,  o si yato  si ilana  Olorun  Oba (Igbo,  p. 6).
meaning:
... tile troll  toat  underrates  me would  fidl headlong  from  one heaven  to 
the other.  I, the  very  man  (of all men),  had  time  spoken;  today  I am going  
to tell you trolls of Igbo Olodumare  that when  toe Creator  created  
everything  in toe  universe,  he  made  man  the  head  of them  all; 1 want  you 
to know  today  that  pride  is the beginning  of (man's)  fall;  it is against  the 
law of man,  and  it is different  from  the plan  <rf God  toe (Heavenly)  king.
In this heated  cynical  exchange  of worlds,  the troll  who  inhabits  the unseen  
world  brags  about  his diabolic  power  to consume  the man  who  inhabits  the 
visible  world,  thereby  proving  to man that he is the head,  and he is fiius  
10






superior  to man.  Fagunwa,  of course,  never  allows  man  to be submerged  or 
relegated  to the background;  in order  to prove  that man  is truly  the head  of 
tod's  created  beings,  he allows  poetic  justice  to take its course.  It is an act of 
theistic  affirmation  in Fagunwa's  narratives  to allow that to happen,  as 
Lindfors  aptly  observes:
The  Christian  God  even  enters  into  the  narrativjes  occasionally  as an active  
agent  of change,  an omnipotent  force that rescues  the righteous  and 
punishes  the wicked.  A sinner  in Fagunwa's  works  is apt to die uttering  
a confession  and declaration  of useful  remorse,  'Ah,  is this  how  miserably  
I end!  If only  I had  used  the grace  which  God  gave  me in a fitting  manner,  
this would  not have  happened  to me.'"
Thus  Olowo-aiye  overcomes  the troll eventually,  a victory  for man  and a 
vindication  of his superiority.
Another  encounter  with the inhabitant  of the unseen  world  is 
Olowo-aiye's  encounter  with  Anjonnu-iberu  who  is the gate-keeper  of Igbo  
Olodumare.  Olowo-aiye  refuses  to swear  by the book  in which  all the sins of 
men  are listed.  Again,  after  a long  time  of verbal  altercation  and  fierce  fighting  
with  the troll,  he overcomes  hiirt,  and  a monument  is built  for Olowo-aiye  in 
that forest  with  an inscription  which  immortalizes  his name  and celebrates  
his fortitude,  thereby  confirming  man as the head  and the controller-  of the 
created  beings  in both  worlds.^
This  kind  of cosmology  is in consonance  with  the basic  world-view  of the 
Yoruba  people,  as Bamgbose  aptly  asserts:
The numerous  spirits,  trolls,  fairies  arid gnomes  that  the hero  of Ogboju  
fights  do not belong  entirely  to the world  of fiction.  The Yoruba  believe  
in the existence  of spirits  of different  forms  not visible  to humans  but 
which  nevertheless  play  an important  part  in their  lives.
It is obvious  then  that Fagunwa's  thought  pattern  is not  without  a basis:  it is 
deeply  rooted  in his culture  and  tradition.  His  imagination  and  literary  vision  
emanate  from his philosophical  milieu,  for as Owotnoyela  appropriately  
remarks:  'he cultivated  an intimate  knowledge  of the strange  world  of Yoruba  
mythology  and its extraordinary  inhabitants.'^
In essence,  theref  ore, Fagunwa's  use of weird  creatures  and  strange  beings  
and his creation  of an invisible  realm  of existence  through  the metaphor  of 
the forest  constitutes  the truth  qf fiction^  which  permeates  his works.
The fact that his setting,  the forest,  is a metaphorical,  archetypal  and 
symbolic  element  of his works  is reinforced  in his epilogue  to his Igbo  
Olodumare  (The  Forest  of  God)  as he warns  his reader:
E mase  gbagbe  wipe  bi aiye  ti dun  to bena  ni isoro  inu  re po to. Igbati  enia 
ba ri isoro  kan soso  nigba  xniran  a da bi empe  ki oluware  ku le kan na ... 
'Mo fe ki gbogbo  eniia  fi si okan  pe ko si eniti  ko ni Igbo  Olodumare  tire 
lati lo ninu  aiye,  Igbo  Olodumare  ti enikan  yato  si ti enik^i.  Ki Olodumare  
jeki olukuluku  ti Igbo  Olodumare  tire de laini  ipalara  (Igbo,  p. 163).
meaning:
Do not  forget  that  the sweeter  the world  is, the more  its difficulties.  When  
one experiences  difficulty  one time,  it often  seems  as if one should  die 
immediately.  I want  all the people  to know  that  there  is no one  who  does  
not have  his own  Forest  of God  to go in the world.  One's  Forest  of God  
is different  from  the other's;  may  God grant  that everyone  would  come
11






back  from  his own  Forest  of God  without  being  wounded.
The Forest  of God,  in this sense,  becomes  a symbol  of the ups and downs  in 
the existential  experience  of all the peoples  in the world.  This is a universal  
import  of Fagunwa's  thought-pattern,  a thought-pattern  which  is skillfully  
fabricated  into his aesthetics.
12






Part IV: Igbo  Olodumare  (The Forest  of 
God)
A brief  analysis  of ?agunwa's  basic  thought  pattern  as a thread  that  is wove'  
into the total  fabric  of his works  leaves  us with  little  to be said  in terms  of the 
background  of  this  major,  and  perhaps  the  best  of his works,  Igbo  Olodumare  
(The Forest  of God),  except  to note the fact that the basic ingredients  of 
Fagunwa's  novels  come  from  folk-tales,  Yoruba  mythology,  and the foreign  
material  as adumbrated  by Bamgbose  who  argues  for and also substantiates  
the fact that Fagunwa  uses material  from  English  literature,  for he believes  
that  'literary  works  in English,  including  translations,  must  have  formed  part 
of the background  of educated  Nigerians  of .Fagunwa's  time,  and Christian  
literature.'^  ,
Igbo  Olodumare  (The  Forest  of  God)  is the story  of Olowo-aiye,  the father  
of Akara-ogun,  who is the main  character  of Fagunwa's  first novel  Ogboju  
Ode. Olowo-aiye  sets out to Igbo  Olodumare  out of love for adventure  and 
quest  for an opportunity  to prove  himself  as a powerful  hunter  who  cannot  
be daunted  by the awe  of the unknown,  a basic  characteristic  of the traditional  
Yoruba  hunters.  Thus Fagunwa,  in his characteristic  vividness  of 
imagination,  artistic  prowess,  dazzling  language  and compelling  descriptive  
skill,  projects  events  and epis ’odes  around  Olowo-aiye  as he moves  along  on 
his journey  to Igbo  Olodumare  (The  Forest  of  God),  he fights  and overcomes  
Esu-kekere-ode,  courts  Ajediran,  gets into seemingly  endless  fight  with the 
troll,  Anjonnu-iberu  the gate-keeper  of Igbo  Olodumare,  seducing  and  killing  
him;  he gains  an entrance  into  Igbo  Olodumare  without  swearing  by his  book.-  
He wins the love and admiration  of the king and the citizens  of Igbo  
Olodumare,  and ends up this episode  with a colorful  wedding;  the king is 
delighted  in joining  him and his fiancee  Ajediran  in a delightful  matrimony.
From  this point,  the narrator  changes:  Akara-ogun,  up till this point,  has 
been  telling  the story  of his father,  Olowo-aiye;  he now  lets Olowo-aiye  tell 
his own story  through  his autobiography  which  Akara-ogun  reads,  as the 
scribe,  presumably  Fagunwa  himself,  writes  down  the story  as a message  to 
the children  of the world,  a rationale  for, and a method  by which  Fagunwa  
sermonizes  and  moralizes  with  ease  and  delight.  Olowo-aiye  goes  out  to hunt,  
but finds  himself  in all kinds  of predicaments,  and gets  stranded  in the forest;  
he eventually  finds himself  in the sage's  house.  There,  his host,  
Baba-onirugbon-yeuke,  introduces  him to Mr. Death  and Ms. Disease.  
Throu^-A  epigrams,  folktale,  proverbs,  and witty discussions,  Olowo-aiye  
learns  at the feet of the sage.
At the close  of the story,  Olowo-aiye,  joined  by Ijambaforiti  (an elephant  
hunter),  Enia-se-pele  (an easy-going  character),  IbanujMsale  (a melancholic  
character),  and Olohun-duru  (an accomplished  singer  and musician)  heads  
back  home.  After  fighting  and  killing  the king  of the snakes,  Ojola-Ibinu,  and 
a host of snakes  through  the help of the charms  given  to them  by the sage,  
Baba-onirungbqn-yeuke,  they continue  their journey.  Ibanuje-isale  strays  
away as the pilgrims  discovered,  after leaving  the territory  of the seven  
vicious-headed  women.  A letter comes  from Baba-onirugbqn-yeuke,  the
13






l,etter  to which  Olowo-aiye  replies.  Qn.their  getting  back  to the palace  of the 
king of Igbo Olodumare,  they all journey  back  home  to join their  families.  
Olowo-aiye  finds  out that his wife  has been  taken  home.  He gets  back  home  
and finds  out that his son, Akara-ogun,  is grown.
Fagunwa's  artistic  skill helps  him to structure  the novel  in a way that 
allows  him to moralize;  his old friend'tells  the story  of his father,  and  the story  
is supposed  to be an allegorical  Inessage  to the children  of the world.  In the 
middle  of the story,  the narrator  changes;  Olowo-aiye  now  tells  his own  story,  
a story  which  is heavily  laden  with didacticism,  and sermonettes.  Through  
his epilogue,  however,  Fagunwa  makes  his intention  known:  he is out to 
teach, and he does so very delightfully  too. Thus didacticisrrf  is not an 
accidental  residue  of Fagunwa's ’naivete'  but a deliberate  objective  which  he 
achieves  through  the use of esoteric  literary  language,  a compelling  
imagination,  vivid  imagery  and an elevated  rhetoric.
The novel  is basically  cultural  and traditional.  The characters,  weird  or 
riormal,  walk,  talk,  eat,live  and do things  as Yoruba  people  would.  They  think  
like the Yoruba;  thus their  basic  institutions  such as kingship,  and marriage  
are 'very  Yoruba'  in nature Through  the metaphor  of the setting,  the forest  
and the thought  pattern  as previously  discussed,  hdwever,  Fagunwa  
transcends  the limitation  of his tradition  and culture  to universalize  his 
artistic  prowess.  Thus  in essence,  Irelt's  insightful  comment  about  Fagunwa's  
novels  is basically  true:
... he strove,  even  with  noticeable  strain,  to get beyond  the limitations  of 
tradition  in the context  of an extended  literary  medium.^
In this sense,  Fagunwa  is not.  a writer  who is limitpd  to his milieu,  but J^e 
touches  all peoples  in all places  by actively  extending  himself  through  his 
craftmanship.
14






PartV: Fagunwa's  Language:  Yoruba
Fagunwa,in  spite  of  his proficiency  in English,  determined,  like  Milton,  about  
three  and  a half  centuries  before  him,  to employ  his mother  tongue  'in a graver  
subject' >5 Although  as Bamgbose  reminds  us, in the mid-1930s  when  
Eagunwa  began'his  attempt  at writing  a novel,  'there  was  hardly  any  written  
tradition  in Yoruba  to fall back  upon,'5°  there  was concerted  effort  by the 
Chris tian missionaries  to encourage  production  of Christian  literature  in the 
vernacular  of the people  among  whom  they  laboured.  This,  of course,  was  a 
fuellin g of the fire that was kindled  by Samuel  Ajayi  Crowther,  one of the 
freed  slaves,  a Yoruba,  who  was  baptized,  and who  was also one of the first 
graduates  of Fourah  Bay College  which  was founded  in 1827 He was sent 
to Nigeria  as a CMS  missionary  to work  among  his own  people,  the Yoruba  
people,  in 1843.^^  One of the monumental  achievements,  pf Bishop  Ajayi  
Crowther  was  his translation  of the Bible  into  Yoruba  as Biheli  1900.
This  was  die genesis  of die use of Yoruba  language  in some  serious  literary  
works,  for P.E.H.  Hair,  as quoted  by Gerard,  believes  that that translation
was of a literary  order comparable  with that of Luther's  German  
translation  or die English  Authorized  Version  'and that Crowther's  
'influence  on subsequent  literature ... without  doubt  was overwhelming  
for his choice  of a dialect  and his selection  of idioms  and expressions  in 
thisdialect  sanctified  for Yoruba  reader  through  his Bible  translations  and 
for the linguist  through  his grammar  and dictionary,  created  Yoruba,  
which  has now even affected  the spoken  language  <md become  so 
widespread  that  other  dialects  are rapidly  disappearing.'^
This  gave  rise to the subsequent  varied  literary  works  from  the middle  of the 
nineteenth  century  up till the late 1920s;  in the early  1930s  those  appeared  as 
serialized  story entitled  Itan Igbesi  Aiye  Emi,Se^gga  by Isaac  B. Thomas  
who was then  the editor  of the weekly'joumal  known  as Akede  Eko. ■ This  
story  followed  the tradition  of the epistolary  novel  patterned  after  Richardsdn's  
Pame7a.5®  With fine appearance  bf Fagunwa's  -first novel  published  by CMS.  
Bookshop,  an epoch  of a serious  Yoruba  literary  tradition  began.
Yoruba  language  is spoken  by about  12Vi  million  of the 90 million  to 100 
million  people  in Nigeria.  The speakers  are located  in the south-western  part 
of Nigeria,  the immediate  northern  part  of Nigeria  — Kwara  State  — and  the 
eastern  part of Benin  Republic.  Its origin  is said to be Sudanic,="  but recent  
linguistic  scholarship  classifies  it as the member  of the Kwa  branch  of the 
Niger  Kordofanian  language  family,  5® a notion  which  is not readily  accepted  
by most  Yoruba  linguists.  Adetugbo,  for example,  discredits  this idea on the 
basis  of the fact that  scholars  are not in agreement  as to the origin  of all the 
people  who speak  the languages  within  file Kwa family,  for. It will be ... 
futile  to isolate  one of the 600 or so group  and posit  for it an origin  without  
reference  to the history  of the other  groups.'® ’ Obviously,  the  argument  about  
the origin  of the language  and of its speakers  is yet to be resolved,  and its 
lengthy  discussion  does  not belong  to the scope  of this  book. >
Though  Yoruba,  like English,  has  the SVO  (Subject  Verb  Object)  as its basic  
structure,  it is slightly  different  from  it synfactically . The  syntactical  difference
15






lies in the position  of an attributive  word  in Yoruba.  (l)-<3)  below  for example,  
show  that Yoruba,  like English,  has subject  verb object  as its basic  structure:
SV O
1. Olowo-aiye  pa Ojola-ibinu  
Olowo-aiye  killed  Ojola-ibinu
2. FagunWa  kg Ogboju  Ode 
Fagunwa  wrote  Ogboju  Ode.
3. Olowo-aiye  ni Omg  Akgwediran  
Olowo-aiye  is the son of Akowediran
The slight  syntactical  difference  lies in the adjectival  phrases  or clauses.  In 
Yoruba  the governing  noun comes  before  the attributive  word or the 
adjectives  as (4)-(6):
4. BibeliMiaig
a. Bible  Holy-
b. Holy  Bible
5. Iwin  buburu  ni Anjgnnu-Ibem
a. gnome  vicious  is Anjonnu-Iberu
b. Anjpnnu-iberu  is a vicious  gnome
6. Mo  mu ada mo  nFn&  imngbgn
a. I took  machete  I using  shave  beard  my
b. I took  a machete,  (and)  I was shaving  my beard  with  it.
c. or I took  a machete  and I was using  it to shave  my 
beard.
(4) and (5) show  clearly  the syntactical  pattern  in the use of adjectives  in 
Yoruba.  (4) and (5) and (6a) for example,  are ungrammatical  in Yoruba,  and 
by the same token  (4a), (5a), and (6a) are ungrammatical  in English.  (6), 
however,  is a complex  sentence,  therefore  it needs  further  analysis.
(6) is what  Bamgbose  describes  as a' compound  sentence  structure,'  except  
it deviates  slightly  from  his basic  definition  of a comp  ound  sentence  structure,  
for 'compound  sentence  structure'  he believes,  'consists ’ of two or more  
sentence  structures  linked  by the linking  element(s)  sugbgn  'but' tabi,  abi 'or' 
yala ... tabi 'whether' ... or'^^ The difference  between  (6) and Bamgbose's  
definition  lies in the fact that (6) does  not have  any linking  element:  the two 
free clauses  are simply  collocated  in Fagunwa's  construction.  Notice  that  (6a) 
is syntactically  different  only in the second  clause,  where  mi 'my' a 
possessive-suffix  of the noun irungbgn  'beard'  which  functions  as an 
adjective — is used.  Its syntactic  pattern  is as follows:
subj. + verb+past  + dir. obj. + subj.  + verb+ing  + indr.  obj. + poss.
Mo, + mu + ada + mo, + nFnfa  + intgbgn  + mi ,
•(®) 1 + take  + machete  +1, + use+ing  + beard  + my
(b) I took a machete;  I was  using  it to shave
my beard
(c) I took  a machete,  and I was shaving  my beard  with  it,
. Another  linguistic  phenomenon  which  a translator  has to take  seriously  is 
the use of the tone  in Yoruba.
16






Yoruba  is a tdilal  language,  therefore  it is very rhythmic.  Eldred  D. Jone's  
description  of the language  is thus  very precise:
AU Yoruba  culture  is enshrined  in the language,  a highly  tonal and 
musical  language  which  gives the impression  of being  chanted  rather  
than spoken.  The rhythmic  and tonal qualities  do not come  over into 
English,  which  is a different  language.
It is this rhythm  which  constitutes  one of the grandeurs  of the language.
Yoruba  has three  basic  tones;  low (\), middle  (—), and high ( ). These  tone  
marks  are written  over the vowels  in order  to realise  the appropriate  tone,  
’hence  the appropriate  meaning.  Should  the tone marks  be misplaced,  the 
meaning  would  be ’changed  completely.  Tone,  in a sense,  may be compared  
to stress  in English,-except  that stress  may  not change  the meaning  of a word  
completely  as its does in Yoruba.^"*  The list of words  in (7), (8), and (9) 
demonstrate  the way in which  tone affects  meaning  in Yoruba.
.a b64
wa 'come' ba 'overtake'
yva 'search' ba 'crouch'
wa 'excavate' ba 'alight'
a b65
qkq 'hoe' awg 'guinea  fowl'
qkq 'husband' awo 'mystery'
qkq 'spear' awo 'eys glass'
a b
old 'honour' owo 'hand'
<51a 'a town  in Qsun  State owo 'broom'
qla 'wealth' dwo 'respect'
As shown  above,  a word  can  mean  three  or more  different  things,  depending  
on the tone.  By the same  token,  the Meanings  of sentences  can  be affected  by 
the appropriate  or inappropriate  use of tone as (10a) (b) and (Ila) and (b) 
illustrate  here;  __
10a 3_______________ n ji___------------------ 1°---------------------------- -
2 Eja__________________ lo______________________________
1_________ o____________________ ra________ ja_______________
Eja d jf jf 16 ra l^a
fish electric  is you  by at market
You  bought  an electric  fish from  the market
10b 3_ ______________ _ ________________ i2------------------------------
2 eja________ ji_________ lo______________ _______ _________ _
1_________ o_________ ji_________ ra________ ja______________
fish a sudden  is you  bought  at market
you  bought  a sudden  fish from  the market
17






please  help  me wash  plate  my 
plase  help me wash  my plateIla 3____ o , wa le
2mi
wa
he drove  me come  home  
he dro^e  me home
11b o wa. wa le
2 mi
1__
he search  me come  home  
he came  to look for me at home  
or he came  to visit  me at home
12a3 wo ba fo
omi WO mi
1 a
jb wo ba mi fo a 
please  help  me smash  plate  my 
please  help  me smash  my platewo mi
12b 3 ' wo ba fo
2 mi wo mi
1 jo fo a
jd wo bd mi fo a wo mi
The  data  (7)-{12)  illustrated  the way  tone  operates  in the language.  Therefore,  
it is obvious  from the analysis  thus far, that Yoruba  derives,  as a tone  
language,  meaning  from the tone, and when the tone is misplaced,  an 
'embarrassing  mispronunciation  which  causes  general  amusement',  as 
Rowland  aptly  puts  it, occurs.  Example  (10b)  and (12a)  illustrate  this  amusing  
mispronunciation,  while  (Ila) and (b) simply  convey  different  meanings.  
Because  the tone  marker  on the word  wa in (Ila)  is low, it means  'drive';  the 
marker  on the.same  work  wd in (11b)  is high,  hence  its meaning,  'come'.
This linguistic  feature  is what a translator  needs to perceive  in his 
translation,  and those linguistic  parameters  make the task of trandating 
Fagunwa  difficult,  among  many  other  things  which  have to do with the 
nuances  of some  ideas  in the novel  which  do not translate  smoothly  into the 
English  language.  As has been  demonstrated  above,  Yoruba  is a rhythmic  
language,  and the rhythm  does not transfer  completely  English.  But since  
rhythmic  pattern  is extensively  used  by Fagunwa  for rhetorical  effect,  efforts  
have  been  exerted  to convey  the rhythm  into English  as much  as possible.
18






Part VI: Fagunwa's  Rhetoric
Fagunwa's  artistic  prowess,  vivjdness  of imagination  and  all we can  attribute  
to him in terms  of literary  excellence,  are all manifested  in his powerful  and
- compelling  use of language?  His Yoruba  is impeccable;  he is a master  of his 
mother  tongue,  for his trade  mark  is rhetoric.  It is almost  impossible  to read  
through  any of Fagunwa's  novels  without  catching  the glipapse  of his 
dazzling  and delightful  use of  language.  Beier  is thus right  when  he asserts  
that
Fagunwa  is fond  of rhetoric.  He likes  words.  He likes  to pile  them  up, say 
the same  thing  over  and  over  again  in infinite  variation.  He is a master  of 
rhetoric,  who can make  repetitions  and variations  swing  in a 
mountainous  rhythm,  like Yoruba  drumming.^^
His language  is adorned  with  proverbs,  epigrams,  and poetic  diction.  As he 
sets out to tell his story  in his first  novel,  for example,  he addresses  his reader  
or audience:
Enyin  ore mi bi owe  bi owe  ni a nlu  ilu-agidigbo,  ologbon  ni i jo o, omoran  
lii si irno'.  Itan ti ngo so yi agidigbo  ni; emi ni eniti  ^o lu ilu na, myin  ni 
ologbon  ti yio jo, enyin  ni omorai)  ti yio mo o pelu. ”
meaning:
My friends  all, like the sonordus  proverb  do we drum  the agidigbo;  it is 
the wise  who  dance  to it, and file learned  who  understand  its language.  
The story  which  follows  is a veritable  ^digba,  it js I who  will drum  it, 
and you  the wise  who  will interpret  it.
This  passage  exemplifies  the way Fagunwa  gets to his audience  through  an 
effective  rhetoric.  He calls  his readers  'my friends',  and he invites  them  to go 
with  him on his imaginative  journey  through  the story.  He states  plainly  that 
the story  is an allegory  through  the metaphorical  use of the agidigbo  drum;  
by doing  that, he is really saying  that 'my story is supposed  to mean  
something:  it is ap^able,  but I want  you to decipher  its meaning.  Thus  the 
first few lines  are packed,  with rhetorical  stories  such  as simile  (the story  is 
like sonorous  proverb),  n^tapjior  (the  narrative  is like drumming),  analogy  
(it is akin  to the sound  of agidigbo).  This  way,  he appeals  to the pathos  and 
the ethos  of his audience;  he is indeed  a competent  rhetorician  like  Cicero  and 
Quintilian  of old. He believes  that as a rhetorician,  he has a resporfeibility  to 
teach  not only  by what  he says,  but  by who  he is as well  —and'we  know  who  
he is through  fire tenor  of what  he says.  So Ulli Beier  is right  as he observes:
Fagunwa's  moralizing  is often  too deliberate  and  it would  be difficult  for 
the adult  reader  to take, if it was not done  with such  charm.  No event  
takes  place,  no situation  is described  from  which  we are not  supposed  to 
learn something.  A nauseating  idea. Yet^who  could object  to being  
'improved'  in such  a charming  manner ...
Therefore  in the first  few lines  of his Ogboju  Ode  as cited  above,  he is saying,  
in a way,  'Come,  go with  me,  as I journey  into  the forest  of the universe;  r^son  
with  me, as I penetrate  into  the abyss  of the human  soul.'  Thus,  the audience
19






is lured  into the realm  of the unseen  world  through  the use of his rhetorical  
power.
Before  this section  is brought  to an end, one more  example  of Fagunwa's  
verbal  gymnastics  could  be cited  from  Igbo  Olodumare  (The  Forest  of God).  
In the epigrammatic  passage  below,  Fagunwa  states the principles  that 
should  ^ide  the lives of the young  men and women  as .they think  about  
family  life:
Okunrin  ti oji ni kutu  ojo aiyere  ti o gbe oran  obinrin  le ibi pataki  ni okan  
aiyare  ko ni di pataki  lai lai; obinrin  ti o ji ni kutukutu  ti o gbe oran  okunrin  
le ibi pataki  okan  aiya re ko ni di pataki  lai lai... (p. 6).
meaning
A man  who  wakes  up early  in the morning  of his life.
And  gives  an important  place  to a woman's  matter  in his heart.
Will  not become  important  forever.
A woman  who  wakes  up early  in the morning  of her life.
And  gives  an important  place  to a man's  matter  in her heart
Will  not  become  important  forever.
The passage  is not only ^igrammatic,  it is rhythmic  as well, hence  its 
conversion  to a verse  from.™  Thus  far, I believe  that  enough  has  been  said to 
illustrate  Fagunwa's  use of a complex  rhetorical  technique  in his novels.
20






Part  VII: Note  on the Translation
The main  purpose  of this work  is to provide  an annotated  translation  of 
Fagunwa's  Igbo Olodtunare,  a translation  'which  respects  the style of the 
original  and the intention  of the author,  thereby  affording  a critical  access  to 
the  novel  by literary  scholars  and  students  of letters  as well  as general  English  
readers.  The desire  to achieve  ttiis objective,  however,  demands  a 
specification  of a philosophy  of translation,  and a careful  choice  of a method  
'and  procedure. ----
Stated  briefly,  my objective  in translating  Igbo  Olodumare  is to translate  
what  is in the novel  rattier  .than  what  ought  to be. To put it in another  way,  
my task  as a translator  is not  to rewrite  Fagunwa's  Igbo  Olodumarem.  English  
in my stylistic  idiosyncrasy  but  to unveil  his meaning  through  his own  words  
and style in the translated  edition^  Thus,  it -is obvious  that this specified  
philosophy  of translation  permits  neither  a free translation  nor unnecessary  
paraphrasing.  It is my belief  that the chosen  method  and procedure  in this 
translation  will make  possible  what  Nida  calls 'the principle  of equivalent  
effect'  ■
The method  which  my specified  philosophy  of the text demands,  is 
basically  semanticommunicative  translation,  a method  of translation  which  
the nature,  of the text (a literary  text which  is naturally  .connotative/^  
demands.  'This  method  necessitates  a literal  translation  which  keeps  the  sense  
of words  and expressions  wjthin  the cultural  perspective  of me original  
language  without  blurring  the intelligibility  of the content  in English,  so that 
the content  is communicative  as well.  In other  words,  the literalness  of the 
translation  does  not  jeopardize  its being  sensible  to the reader  of the English  
edition,  and though  some words  have taken  new senses,  figurative  or 
metaphorical  sinpe  they  emanate  from  the culture  of the original  language  of 
the text (Yoruba),  where  the intelligibility  is somewhat  m danger,  the 
annotation  is used  as a means  of protection.  Such  situations  can  be instanced  
in several  places  in the text.
’ One instance  is seen when  the narrator  meets  his old friend  in the first 
chapter  of the  novel,  and  his friend  tries  to tell him (the  narrator)  that  he has 
not  chart^ed,  and  that  his  strength  is still  intact;  Eagunwa  makes  him  say,  'emi  
iti gte  re atijg  beniagbara  miko  dinku,  egungtm  tube  lata oktmrin,  'which  is 
render^  as follows:  'I am your  old, old mend,  and my strengtti  is still intact,  
because  there  are  bones  in man's  body'.  A less relaxed  and an extreme  literal  
translation  would  read: '... lam your ofd friend,  and my strength  is not 
lessened;  there is bone  in man's  body,.'  I have  been  extremely  literal  in the 
latter  translation  of these  lines,  in order.to  make  the point  that  the word  hope  
is used as a metaphor  for 'strength'  or 'power'  within  the, culture  of the 
original  language — Yoruba.  That is the acceptable  metaphor  or physical  
description  of a powerful  person.  Notice-that  ttie former  rendering  is more  
relaxed,  and yet 'literal;'  that way,  the translation  keeps  the original  sense  of 
the world  'bone',  and,  in order  to achieve  clarity  and  protect  the intelligibility  
of the idea, the word'hone'  is annotated.
' Another  word'ia'path'.  This word takes a mew sense, because  it is 
transplanted,  so to speak,  from.the  cultural  context  of Yoruba.  The word  is
,2-1






used  when  the narrator's  wife  advises  him  not to be afraid  to concentrate  on 
the work  which  Akara-ogun,  who  is to tell the  story  of  his fattier  (Oliwo-aiye),  
will give  him. The narrator's  wife  assures  her husband  of her total  support,  
when  she perceives  the husband's  expression  of anxiety  at the sight  of his 
friend,  Akara-ogun,  who will put him through  the task of writing  the long,  
involved  story  of his father,  Olowo-aiye.  Fagunwa  makes  her  say'... Ng  o tgju 
Here,  ng o tgju ona re,ng  o tgju gmg .. ..'(p.  8), In translation  it reads,  'I shall  
take care of your  path;  I shall  take cafe of (your)  child  ...' 'Path'  is used  in a 
metaphorical  sense here to indicate  everything  that the character  does,  
including  his coming  in and his going  out. Therefore,  in order  to protect  the 
intelligibility  of the idea,  'path'  is carefully  annotated.
Furthermore,  I need to emphasize  the fact that ttiough  it has been  my 
intention  to keep the senses  of words  and expressions  within  the cultural  
perspective  of the original  language,  injelligibility  and 'the principle,  of 
equivalent  effect'  are the overriding  aims  of the method  and the procedure  
employed  in the translation.  Hence  the branding  of the method  as 
'semanticommunicative'.  That  means,  of course,  that  I have  had  to take  some  
liberty  to translate  some  passages  in such  a way  as to enhance  the  achievement  
of intelligibility  and  equivalent  effect  thereby  effecting  a balanced  translation  
— a translation  which  does  not only  respect  the style  of the original  and the 
intention  of the author,  but maintains  the interest  of the English as 
well.  Therefore,  the expression  like: '... ng o tgju gmg,  ngosiwa  ayepataki  
si gnigna  gfun'(p.  9), when  translated  extremely  literally,  reads  '.I shall  
take  care  trf child,  and  I shall  prepare  an important  food  into  the path  of your  
throat.  This  rendering  sounds  too burdensome  for the reader  in English  
burdensome  in the sense  that the  reader  has to pause  and try to make  sense  
out of such  a cumbersome  statement.  Therefore,  in order  to deliver  the reader  
from  such  unnecessary  strain  and pain,  I have  had to translate  it as follows:  
... I shall  take  care  of (our)  child,  and I shall  prepare  some  delicious  food  for 
you to enjoy.'  This  rendering  is both relaxed  enough  to be clear,  and literal  
enough  to preserve  the author's  style  and intention  as well.
Anpther  example  of such  a cautious  translation  is the statement  which  the 
narrator  makes  while talking  to his wife about  the way their guest,  
Akara-ogun,  will be received  in their home.  In his desire  to prefect  what  
should  be the prevalent  situation  in an ideal home,  FagUnwa  makes  the 
'narrator  say, '... A o fi igbadun  He wa han  fun alejo  wa,' (p. 8) rendered  as 
'... We shall demonstrate  to our guest  that ttiis is a very ddighful  hunity  
indeed.'  Again,  thih preserves  the stylistic  prowess  of the author,  and 
maintains  ttre interest  of the reader  irt &rglish  as well.
In my earlier  discussion  of the language  of ttie text,  Yoruba,  I have  briefly  
touched  upon the linguistic  parameters  of ttie language  as well as the 
rhetorical  prowess  of Fagunwa  in the novel,  the rhetOTical  prowess  vttiidi  
does  not make  the task of the translator  an easy cme. Therefore,  whenever  
needed,  a narrative  bridge^  is constructed  in parenttieses,  in order  to ^nlwnce  
a smcmtti  flow  of Fagunwa's  narrative  in the translated  edition.  Thus  
the adopted  method  of translation  and procedure,  I have  bem  able  to work  
through  the m^ of his bizzare  imagery,  unusual  structure,  strange  
characters,  movii^  through  Fagunwa's  struige  setting,  and, very quickk  
from  one  event  to me other,  acting  out  ttie  essence  of ttieir  nnme nrlah iro, wittt  
such  an enttiusi^stic  narrative  style,  to preserve  Fagunwa's  sensibility,  style,  
meaning  and  motive  as much  as I could.  The ihythm  of Fagunwa's  unusual  
22






verbal  gymnastics  cannot,  due to the nature  of English  as a nontonal  
language,  be adequately  conveyed  in the translated  edition,  but enough  
efforts  have  been  exerted  to present  the substance  of his thought  pattern,  to 
expand  the readership  of Igbo  Olodiunare,  and ultimately  enlist  the interest  
of the reader  in English.






Notes
1. Both  translations  were  puljlished  in ODU:  Journal  of Yoruba,  Edo  and  Related  
Studies,  No. 9 (1963),  31:34;  35-37.
2. Bamgbose,  p. 1.
3. Ibid.,  p. 8.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid.,  p. 18.
6. Ibid.,  pp. 19,22.
7. Tradition  and  the Individual  Talent,'  in W.J.  Bate,  e., Cntidsm:  TheMajorTexts,  
enlarged  edn. (NeW  York:  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich,  Inc., 1970),  p. 525.
8. Bamgbose,  p. 130.
9. Ibid.
10. 'D.O.  Fagunwa:  A Yoruba  Novelist,'  ODU:  A Journal  of West  AEdcan  Studies  
(September  1963),  28.
11. Ibid.
12. UUi Beier,  Tagunwa:  A Yoruba  Novelist,'  Black  Orpheus,  No. 16 (June  1965),  p.
13. Ibid.,  p. 55.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.,  p. 26.
16. Irele,  p. 75.
Yif. Ibid.
18. Ibid.,  pp. 81-82.
19. Ibid.,  p. 86.
20. Ibid.,  p. 87.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid.,  p. 91.
23. Ibid. *See  note  No. 24.
24. Ibid.,  p. 92.'
25. Ibid.,  p.. 100.
26. Afolabi  Olabimtan,'Religion  as a Theme  in Fagunwa's  Novels,'  ODU:  A Journal  
of West  African  Studies,  No. 11 (January,  1975),  101-114.
27. Ibid.,  p. 101.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.,  p. 102.
30. Ibid.,  p. 111.
31. Bamgbose,  p. 1. Bamgbose  acknowledges  the following  sources  as his basic  
sources  of information  as regards  Fagunwa's  date  of birth:  A. Olubumo,  'Awon  
Onkawe  Yoruba  Ode  Oni: Daniel  Fagunwa  (Apa  Kinni)  1903-1963,'  in Olokun  
No. 4 (March  1964);  A. Oyedele,  'Daniel  Fagunwa  (Oloogbe)'  in Olokup,  No. 6 
n.d.  However,  Donald  E. Herdeck  in his  AAipui  Authors:  A Companion  toBhud:  
AEican  Writing,  Vol. 1,1300 —1973 (Washington:  Blade  Orpheus  lYess,  1973),  p. 
135,'suggests  1910  as Fagimwa's  date  of birth.  Since  the sources  from  which  to 
glean  an accurate  biography  of D.O.  Fagunwa  are extremely  few at tire  time  of 
the writing  of tins  work,  Ba^bose  is thus  acknowledged  as the nuqor  source  of
24-






Ulis  biographical  information.
32. Ibid.,  Bamgbose  defines  ord  as 'bull-roarer'.  Ord  is a form  of African  Traditional  
Religion  which  is mainly  known  among  the Yoruba  people.  It is related  to 
ancestral  worship,  and its spirit  is invoked  by the use of a piece  of bamboo  tree 
carved  into  a flat  ruler-like  object,  about  six to eight  inches  long,  with  a tiny  hole  
bored  on one end of it, a hole through  which  a long string  is tied.  When  it is 
swung  around  vigorously,  it roars  very  loudly,  and the presence  of Ord  is said 
to be invoked.  Women  are strictly  forbidden  to come  out  atthe  dusk  during  the 
week  in which  Ord  annual  festival  is being  held.
33. In the  same  way  that  Tutuola's  PaZm  Wine  Drinkardis  now  rendered  into  'fifteen  
- languages  worldwide;'  See Ad. 'Obe  Obe,  'An Encounter  with  Amos  Tutuola,'
West  A/rica,  14 May  1984,  p. 1022.
34. His Ogboju  Odeninu  Igboiruningleis  said  to have  been  made  into a movie  by 
the Nigeria's  famous  playwright  and  actor,  Hubert  Ogunde.
35. Bamgbose,  p. 3.
36. inii Beier,  'Fagunwa:  A Yoruba  Novelist,'  Black  Orpheus,  Vol. 16 (June  1965),  
51-56;  Olubumo,  however  thinks  that  moralisation  does  not  bother  Fagunwa's  
audience.  See  A. Olubumo,  'D.O.  Fagunwa;  A Yoruba  Novelist'  ODU:  A Journal  
of West  African  Studies  (September  1963),  26-30.
37. Bamgbose,  p. 19.
38. See  Morton  T. Kelsey,  TheOtherSideofSilence:  A Guide  to Christi  an Meditation  
(New  York;  Paulkst  Press,  1976),  pp. 33-41;  Eph.  6:11;  Acts  16:31.
39. Daniel  Goleman  & Richard  J. Davidson,  eds., Consdousness:  Brain State of 
Awareness,  and  Mysticism  (New  York:  Harper  & Row,  Publishers,  1979),  p. 18.
40. Ibid.
41. Bemth  Lindfors,  'From  Theme  and Style  in the Narratives  of D.O. Fagunwa,'  
InternationalBiction  Review,No.  6 (1979),  13. His quotation  from  Ogbojuis  from  
the translated  edition  of The  Forest  of  a Thousand  Daemons:  A Hunter's  Sag^  
translated  by Wole  Soyinka  (London:  Nelson,  1968),  p. 130.
42. D.O.  Fagunwa,  Igbo  Olodumare  (London:  Nelson,  1949),  pp. 32-41.
43. Bamgbose,  p. 11; see also Omolara  Ogundipe-Leslie„'lhe  Poetic  of Fiction  by 
Yoruba  Writers,'  ODU:  A Journal  of West  AAican  Studies,  New  Series  No. 16 
(July,  1967),  85-95,
44. Oyekan  Owomoyela,  African  Literatures:  An  Introduction  (yjal&am:  Crossroad  
Press,  1979),  p. 33.
45. What  I call  the 'truth  of fiction'  here  is a kind  of realism  which  means  that  within  
the creative  fiction,  there  is always  an Inherent  possibility  of reality,  for the - 
autnor  does  not  write  in a vacuum,  and,  in Fagunwa's  case,  he is inspired  by  the 
myth,  epigram,  and the philosophy  or thought-pattern  of his culture  and 
tradition.
46. Bamgbose,  p. 18.
47. Bamgbose,  pp. 8-9.
48. Abiola  Irele:  'Tradition  and Yoruba  Writer:  D.O.  Fagunwa,  Amos  Tutuola  and 
Wole  Soyinka,'  ODU:  A Journal  of West  African  Studies,  New Series  No. 11 
(January  1975),  p. 79.
49. John  Milton:  'At a Vacation  Exercise  in die College,'  in John  Milton:  Complete  
Poems  and  Major  Prose  (Indianapolis:  The  Odyssey  Press,  1957),  p. 30.
M. Bamgbose,  p. 15.
51. Albert  S. Gerard:  African  Language  Literature:  An Introduction  to tire Literary  
History  ofSub-Sahatm  Afica  (Three  Continents  Press,  1981),  pp. 246-51.
25






52.. Ibid.,  p. 246.
53. Ibid.
54. The  Early  Studies  of Nigerian  LnnguagestfiiasiiaAAgfrA'lfn),  pp.  4-30  quoted  in 
Gerard,  pp. 246-47.
55. Bamgbose,  p. 15.
56. Ibid.
57. NA.  Fadipe,  TRe Sociology  of Yoruba,  ed. by Francis  Olu Okediji  and Oladqo  
Okediji  (Ibadan:  Univenity  of Ibadan  Press,  1970),  p. 55.
58. Karen  Rutji  Courteney,  'A Generative  Phonology  of YorubA,'  Diss.  University  of 
California,  1968,  p. 1.
59. Abiodun  Adetugbo,  'The  Yoruba  Language  in Yoruba  History,'  in S.O.  Biobakil,  
ed. Sources  of Yoruba  History  l\jandon-.  Oxford  University  Press,  1973),  p. 181.
60. This sentence  is taken  from  the text: D.O.  Fagunwa,  I^o  Olodumare  (London:  
Nelson,  1949),  p. 64; it is a caption  under  the illustration.
61. Ayo Bamgbose,  A Grammar  of Yoruba  (London:  Cambridge  University  Press,  
1966),  p. 29.
62. See E.C. Rowlands,  Teach Yourself  Yoruba  (London:  The English  Universities  
Press,  Ltd.,  1969),  p. 2.
63. Ibid.
64. Fadipe,  p. 55.
65. See also Courtenay,  p. 32.
66. UUi Beier,  'Fagunwa:  A Yoruba  Novelist,'  Black  Orpheus,  6 (1965),  53.
67. D.O.  Fagunwa,  Ogboju  Ode ninu  Igbo  Irunmqle  (London:  Nelson,  1950),  p. 1.
68. This  is Soyinka's,  translation,  cited  from The  Barest  of a Thousand  Oaemans:  A 
Hunter's  Saga  (London:  Nel^n,  1968),  p. 1.
€9. UUi Beier,  p. 53.
70. As an example  of my effort  to convey  the rhythm  into the English  edition,  I 
decided  to convert  the prose into a verse form, as UUi Beier and Bakare  
Gbadamosi  had done  in Aeir  translation  of the first  chapter  of ^bo  in 1963.  See 
ODU:  A Journal  of Yoruba  Edo  and  Related  Studies,'^(A.  9 (1963),  31-34,35-37.
71. S.H.  Steinberg,  ed. Cassell's  Encyclopedia  ofVforldLiterature,\o\.  1 (New  York:  
■ Fund  & Wagnails  Company,  1954),  p. 555.
TZ. Peter Newmark,  Approaches  to Translation  (London:  Pergamon  Press Ltd.,  
1981),  pp. 117-120.
73. Narrative  bridge  is a word  or words  or phrases  added  to die original  narrative  
in parentheses  to die translated  edition,  in order  to maintain  a smooth  flow,  
int^gibility  and  clarity.
26






The Forest  of God












1
The Beginning  of Olowo-aiye^
It was  on a sweltering  afternoon,  after  ! had  eaten  the second  meal  of 
the day,  that  I left  my  house  and  strolled  to the  outside  of the city  wall.  
I climbed  to the top of a huge  rock;  when  I reached  the top (of the 
rock),  I sat down  under  a tree  that  grew  there,  hugging  my  legs  to my 
chest.  The sun  was  scour^gly  hot  indeed;  human  bodies  were  as hot 
as heated  yam  flour  pot/  Sweat  soaked  all the children  of the world  
as if they  had poured  water  on themselves.  I, who had worn  a cap 
before,  who  had tilted  my cap pointedly  towards  my forehead^  took  
my cap off the crown  of my  head  and  peaceful  air was  blowing  across  
my  head.  I also  took  off my clotiies,  except  my  pants  which  remained  
on my buttocks.  The afternoon  was sun-ripened  indeed.  The  farmers  
had  left  their  farms;  they  were  laughing  in 4ieir  farmhuts.  The  carriers  
were  unable  to talk; they  w«e  panting  as fliey  were  climbing  toe  hill. 
The  pathway  was  as hard  aS stone,  and toe roots  of the trees  were  as 
solid  as iron-dross.  The ground  was as red as palm  oil,-^ the niffs  of 
white  trousers  were dust-stained;  the hems  of men's  flowing  
garments  were  red. I sympathized  with  the lorry  crew:  toeir  bodies  
were  full of dust.  They  were  as dirty  as the shrubs  by toe roadside.  
Those  who  were  sitting  at toe  back  of toe lorry  were  powdered  as with  
irksome  face  powder;  they  were  as rust-coloured  as mud  walls.  Dust  
covered  all the children  of toe world;  toe host  of living  creatures  felt 
toe scourging  power  of toe sun.  The  lizards  were  running  about,  arid 
toeir  bodies  were  making  rustling  sounds  on toe dry leaves.  The  big 
birds  had ceased  to cry; for I had heard  toe call of toe larkhroled  
cuckoo;  I had  listened  to the voice  of toe dove;  toe red-feathered  bird 
had cried;  aluho^  had spoken,-®  but every  one of them  kept  deadly  
silent  where  God  had shelter^  them;  only  the little  birds  that  were  
not bigger  than  swallows  were  toe ones  flying  here  and there,  they  
were unstable  like a leaf on toe surface  of dw water.  They  were  
hopping  from  one tree to toe other  and  were  crying  lik«  baby  ducks.
Thus  was I, sittirig  down  quietly,  looking  at the eye of life and 
musing  about  toe children  of men,  for I have  lived  with  various  kinds  
of people.  The  tone  to which  I am now  referring  was  a crucial  period
29






in my  life,  for it was  at that  time  that  my  father  shut  his eyes,  crossed  
to the other  side  of file river,  and  hade  file world  goodbye;  and the 
cock  crew  inhisabsence.  The matterwas  painful  to me; itpenetrated  
to the depth  trf my marrow.  My father  had no equal  among  men.  He 
and  my  mother  loved  each  other,  andfiiey  laid  a good  example  before  
us children:  before  me, Adeyemi,  OjuoLape,  and Omotunde.  Re^li  
Osunypmi^  who was my mother,  was a woman  who loved  her 
husband  and her children  very much.  Tears of mercy  filled my 
mother's  eyes.  She  is still  alive  today;  but  my  father  is not.  My  father's  
death  hurt  me deepty,  for he treated  me as a father  should  treat  his 
child;  I also  tried  as unidi  as I could  to please  him  so that  he would  
realize  that  I appreciated  all he had  done  for me.l  was  thinking  about  
many  things  within  me:if  my father  had not died  untimely,  I would  
have graced  his life with those  things  that  were  conjured  up in my 
imagination.  For if a man dresses  in rags like a peasant  and he is 
clothed  with  borrowed  clothes,  as long  as he does  not  forget  those  who  
begat  him,  God  will  never  forget  him  either.  But as I was  pondering  
these things,  (little  did I know  that) the Creator's  language  was 
different: from  mine,  and God was wiser  than I. One day, in the 
morning,  a message  came  to me from  home  that  my father  had gone  
to the vault  of heaven.  Thus  I became  down-hearted,  sank deep in 
grief.  Mid my body  became  feverish  with  anxiety;  my stomach  was 
upset  and  troubled  just  as when  the wind  moves  the  trees  in the  forest.  
Life  was  disgusting  to me  like  a filfliy  rag,  and  heaven  was  as beautiful  
as gold  in my eyes.
These  were the thirds  that I was contemplating  on that hot 
afternoon  that  I have  been  speaking  about,  as I had  been  sitting  on the 
rock.
Little  did I know  that  as I was sitting  down,  there  was  somebody  
in a small  bushy  area close  to where  I was; I was not aware  of this 
before.  I simply  sat  down,  staring  ahead;  I did not take time  to spy 
into  nooks  and  around  the  comers  near  me.  If I had  known  this  before,  
I would  simply  have  turned  my head  in another  direction;  I would  
have  sat down  where  nobody  would  have  been  able  to find  me, for I 
wanted  to think  deeply  at that time,  and I did not want  anyone  to 
interrupt  me at all, for one should  play  at the time  for play,  fight  at 
file time  for fitting,  weep  at file time  for weeping,  and  rejoice  at the 
time  for rejoicing.  He who  is going  to a party  and  wears  the cap of a 
farmer,  is dressed  in clothes  like a traveller's,  and wraps  a cloth  
around  his leans  like  one  who  is going  to hunt  game,  fiiat  person  has 
taken  his sacrifice  beyond  the crossroads.^  As I was tfunking  very  
seriously  at that  moment;  I did  not want  anyeme  to disturb  (the flow  
of my  thought)  at all.
But whefiier  I liked  it or not,  this  man  deliberately  confronted  me. 
I was  angry  at  him,  and  I frowned  like  a hungry  person;  I was  sitting  
like a man  under  stress.  I frowned  like a house-boy  who  broke  his 
30






master's  dishes  and  dared  not tell him,  hut continued  to hang  by the 
walls,  while  his stomach  is disturbed  and troubled  like die foam  of 
palmwine  in a jar.
When  the man  greeted  me, I answered  him  very  softly.  Why  did I 
answer  him  at all? So that  it mij^t  not seem  as if I had over-reacted,  
lest  people  call me a4nean  fellow,  so thatj>eople  might  not think  that 
I was not a gentleman.  This  was  what  impelled  ih&to  answer  him at 
all. I merely  greeted  him;  it was  not tom  die depth  cxf my heart.
After  Ihad  greeted  him,  I began  bRjChave  in such  a way  as to make  
him angry  and go away:  I kept  silent^idid  not speak;  he spoke  I did 
not  laugh.  I got  up from  where  I was  sitting  and  played  aloM  die  base  
of the rock  widiout  asking  for  permission  from  him  as I ought  to have  
done,  and  when  I came  back  again,  I found  him  still on die saihe  spot.  
I simply  sat down  again,  without  saying  a word  to him, without  
greeting  him,  without  talking  to him,  and without  lookingat  his face 
at all. I was  singing  aJtdvihistiing^did  notevenask  him to sit down.  
But  what  really  irked  me  was  that  I saw  the man  sit on the  rock,  closely  
clinging  to me as a baby  would  to his mother.  At that  point,  I thought  
that  that  did  it; trouble  drove  me out  of the house,  and  now  I have  run 
into  trouble  on the rock:  I had  taken  a bigger  morsel  than  my mouth  
could  take;  I had prepared  yam-flour  with  cold water,®  I had used  
beancake  to eat rice;  I had given  gari^  to a white  man  to eat.
As I was  thinking  about  these  things,  the man  suddenly  shouted  in 
a thunderous  voice.  His voice  sounded  as if a hcxxllum  threw  plates  
down  from  a high  place.  Fear  gripped  me like the wife  of a man  who  
.went into battle:  I shcxik  like an old half-disjointed  motorcycle  
dimbinga  hill,  for tiie man's  voice  was  as loud  as a licai's;  it shcxik  the 
earth  like that  of an elephant;  it filled  the whole  forest  like that  of a 
train  which  is dose  to me city and blows  its horn  ceaselessly.  It was 
not until  this time tiiat I was able to look  at him very  closely.  I was 
quite  astounded  when  I found  out that  he was  an old friend  of mine.  
He was, indeed,  three men rolled  into one: Akara-ogun,  
he-who-cares-not-to-die-fpr-a-focxl-owner,  he who  fou^t  ^gbakd  in 
die  forest  of four  thousand  daemons;^®  itwas  he who  visited  my  house  
in days  gcme  by, when  the news  of the visit  spread  ti'iou^iout  this 
whole  naticm.  He lcx>ked  at me and  Began  to lau^.  I looked  at Him 
too and  lau^ter  came  out  of my moufli.  We  both  greeted  each  other.  
He did not Icxik  older  than  he used  to, in my eyes.  But  his gun  had 
become  darker;  it was like a doth  dyed  in indigo  worn  by an old 
woman,  which  had  been  bou^t  before  my  mother  entered  the  house  
of her husband  — a dotti  vidiich  had  been  dyed  several  times  — and 
had become  extremely  Made  indeed.  Akar<>gxm's  cap also pleased  
me, because  vihenever  he stuck  matches  and tobacco  in die cap,  and 
bent  it towards  his forehead,  it locdced  like  a fruit  dancing  on the tree. 
Whenever  he passed  by and tilted  his cap pointedly  towards  his 
forehead,  it took  die shape  of a walking  And  at times  when  he
31






. ’ wanted  to show  off,  he bent  the cap towardshis  ear  ^cheek-bone);  that
' ( , ‘wayxitilodlt^lilceapalmwinegoxirdtledaFQund ’thetrunkofa'palm-
'• taoisii^rBrfarMlsafcV-'AkaraHJ^MaK'  ’h
i- ■,F He'also  i4r^wcred;-'he'said)'^Thaf ’feme.f ‘ ' • * ' ■ *’ :•
i . }"^als»ca^<^'him^ie9ecortd-lim®,  I-saidpAkdra^Oguftt' ’; ’
I - 1^0  ai^wer^'again;,he'sai<t,  'Yes;  go drvwitfi-yourtalk.'  *
, - n Icaltedhimagain4hetf»ird<time*also;  Is^clj/Akard-Ogun!' ’ >>
He too bursfeinto  laughter-;  he beathis-chesf  ivitkhis  hand;  he'said
• widi  f^ide,  'AkararOgun  is my naihe;  kbear  a/greatrnataTe;  and  l’chose
'an appropriate  onki^  and I walk  aroundrteemly.  ramydur'  old) old, 
friend,  and  my strength  is still  intact,  because  there  aye bonesin  man'-s  
body Stick  your  hmid  in your  pocket;  perhapsyou  woixld-findsome  
. writing  material  there; some  marvellous  thing  is about  to happeh
i today;  I have  st message  for you  which  I would  like  you  to deliver  to
• , the children  of die worid;  because  I have  an important  matter  ih rhy
I head)  a very  pertiftent  piece  of advice  is in my  head  as well . Therefore,
' ' I urge  you  in the name  of the black  race/  please  prostrate  yOurself  on
1 the rock, and let us make  the rock our table. I shall stand  as the
! chairman,  and you as the scribe;  and let the shrubs  represent  the.
* members  of our association:'  "
After  he  had  tiros  spoken/I  wasas  happy  as bne  who  had  been  sued  
‘ .-in court,'but  eventually  discharged  and  acquitted;  for J-have  found.
' -what  I had been  broking  for; 1- have  come  across  what  I adored;  God
’ had.buttered  my bread.  Indeed;  1 stuck  my hand  inmy  pocket,  as he
' j had told me to, and.I ’found.a  lot of writing  materials  there.  So I
I prostrated  myself  (on the rock)  and got busy  with  the work.
• Akara-ogun  also gently  sat  .by me on the rock  and started  to talk 
like a parrot;  he said:
'Truly>  I am T^rarogun;  the father  who  begat  me  was a herbalist;  
J he was dso an Ifa 'priest;^^'  our house,  is filled  -to the brim wife
i medicine;  strange  things  are in the comers  of our room;  potent
' medicim  is up  on our attic,"  we have  all kinds  of living  ^things  in our
' backyard:  He  who  had  epilepsy  was  cured  bymy  father;  the one  wh6
had guinearworm,  his.guinea-worffl  was'cured;  thousands,  of lepers  
; were turned  to'sleek  beauties,  in our home.  My father  lashed
} small-po»;.  he insulted  malnutrition;-  he defamed  arthritis';
' stomachache  was minimized;  back*ache  was-rendered  'speechless;
J I thread-worm  kept-mute;  fever  walked  about  in depression.  Dysentery
i was  down-hearted;  slarv-rash  died  tears;  wounds  si^ed;  craw-craw'js
! countenance  fell; and-cold*  longed  for mercy.  . A lunatic  lady  now
ostentatiously  walked  arourid  in Sanity;.a,  mentallysick  man how  
shaves  huhself . Pregnant  womm  delivered  safely;  women  with  babies  
joyfully  went  about  their  daily.routine'S;  wizards  expressed  contrition;
' tire Witches  were  pleading  for.  forgiveness.  Ihe medicine  men  bowed
) down-before  piyfather . Mydear  Jriend,.as ‘ 1 had  told  you  in days  gone  
5©






by; pay mother  was a terrible  w  itch.  •..She flewbifa-'^c-nopiTidayAhd  
sJ^ared , in 'fee  ’evening;,'  she,  tlrank<\¥q(ter  frdpv  arh&aan'jskultetf^  
-liio^fer.had  eaten  .adieap'of  «Jb^5.g(^|jf^3a3meafr36roin-;a.child^hrfr^  
sh&ljad-eafcen.'Tice  with  mehtiroinfanadulKsi-fi^and^^'b&^^/n  
with'^esbfrbmihe'cheek^tbf  youngyn;  r':J isdSi.l'm  Ifthdo  Sk 
M^^Che.story'of  hov/^y  &th«raiamedjm.3^  niotherjaeed&-t0  
fQr.r5ihd ’neveranfintia4^  that t«»:5i»«{befdt^z^dl(laS§ijred<y^)> ’it 
i^-adfeUghtfulstni^^indtee^.'Ihemi.iiidthinghKDutmJjfathec'^ife.SEatS  
was not known  to me/because  hehirnself  nev.erjreleiit6drhis,.efforts!  
Tirhenniewas  hefe.ori  ^ajthrAa-injMdthe'E  wasjipastiftg.yatnain-iathre,  
he was at tiie same  time inwardly.  Sfiarchihg  fdhafkriife.  ^.Wheniher
Will  not  become  import^t  forever.
A woman  who  wakes  up early  in the morning  of her life. 
And  gives  an important  place  in her  heart  to a man's  matter  
Will  not become  important  forever.
A man  who  is mature  enough  to get married
And  gives  an important  place  in his heart  to his woman's  
matter
Will  become  important  forever.
A woman  who  is mature  enough  to get married
And  gives  an important  place  in her  heart  to her  husband's  
matter
Will  become  important  forever.
A deceitful  man  who  marries
A deceitful  woman.
And  gives  an important  place  in his heart  to deceit.  
Will  never  become  important  forever.
A deceitful  woman  who  marries
A deceitful  man.
And  gives  an important  place  in her heart  to deceit.  
Will  not become  important  forever;
An important  man  who  marries  a deceitful  woman.
And does  not give an important  place  in his heart  to the 
deceitful  one
Will  become  important  forever.
Whoever  is important  and  gives  and  important  place  in his 
heart  to others  who  are import^t
Will  become  important  forever."
33'






' ''As I ant  now  speaking,'my  fiiend,  tears  almost  flow  frdmmy  eyes,,  
because  I remember  my father,  Olowo^aiye,  a handsome  man  indeed!  
But I shall continue  the rest  of my stoiy  tomorrow-^The  itory  that I 
told  you  long  ago,  which  ydu  wrote  dowri  for the  children  of mten'was.  
all about  myfather.  So my  frien<VI  diall  rise;  you  get Up also  from  the- 
rock'on  which  you have  prostrated  (for so Igrtg),  ’so’th^tyOu  might  
avoidchest-pain;  I knowyour  house;  I di^l  Vjsit  youtpntorrow  .• When  
I do,'I shall continue  wiflx,  my father's  story.  .Until  tpmoiTow,  then,i  
may  the Lord  bless  our  coming  toother  then!' ' ,
After  he had^usspoken,  he disappeared.  'Ihereafteri  Lquickly  got 
up from  the rpdfrand'headed  homeJ • • ’ . "
The  follO^^gmoming,  after  I had  taken  eAnmadeout  of fre Arom  
with moinmc^^  and sat down,  I sa’M^Akara-ogun,  wlw> appeared  
before  me like an apparition.  He still tilted his cap toward  his 
forehead,  as he used  to do, and  his cap looked  like the beak  of a bird.
V ■
34






’■ ’"a i \. L. 9 si *"» '• < t ' , A., i» n , » « » I * • t
' , J- < r * , ’ *■ ■ ’ » *' f ’
-**' *»>»»»  •' • f j *
a':'.'-/, ’./; ■'',. ".'‘’f
t . ■; , i , ,, , , .
Olp^wo-aiye  &es:i6  the Forest  of God
* • * • 2^ •• . '^' 1 < I • •', J , « ’ _ ,/ I
* / ‘ * f 11 i(j )
•As sOon I sow  Al^afa-oiguxv  I knew  that die big t^k  was about  to. 
’Jjegin.  I tuitied  to my  Wife,'and  l said,  T>^  wife,  something  is about  
to happen.' -
She ^1^ ‘^'anSW^i^d  slb^d  said,  'Nothing  is about  to happen,  dear  
husband;  just be prepared;  God,  the (heavenly)  King  will assist  you.  
‘ I know  that  you have  a lot to do, but the task  has to be done;  I shall  
take care of ydur  hoine;  I shall  take care of your  path;^^  I shall take 
care,of  our child;  and I shallprepare  some'delicious  food  for you to 
er^y.'* ’-‘ > ’ • > .
.^er  my wife  had thus  ^xikerv  I answered  herand  said,  'I thank  
you for your  grfeat  advice;  I knew  you fo be an encouraging  woman.  
I shall  continue  die tasl^I  assureyou  as aman;  you  cany  on with  your  
work,  and I ^uilk^ahead  with  mine.  I am truly  a m^,  and  you are 
truly  a woman.-We  ^lall  demonstrate  to our guest  that diis is a.very  
deli^tful  faifiily  indeed.  *
'A strong  per^n  commands  die respect  of the son of man,  but a 
lazy man  is next-to-nothing  in. the si^t  of women.'^l  I &tered  and 
gadiered  my writing  materials.  I took  a chair  and sat by die table.  I 
^so  placed  one other  chair  by the .table;  it was oti diis chair  tiiat  my 
friend  sat: Akara-ogun-he-who-cares-not-to-die-with-the-food-  
owner.  Akera-c^un  begant^to  speak,  and  he said:
'My friend;  it was  in^^e  twenty-fifth  year  of my father's  life, that 
he got  himself  ready  (to  go). One  day,  early  in the morning,  he  headed  
towards  a strange  forest  near our l|ometown  to hunt;  our town's  
people  knew  die forest  as die Forest  of God,  for it was  a very  dreadful  
forest  indeed.  Even  the hunters  dreaded  Igbo  Olodumare^  more  dian  
the Forest  of Four  Thousand  Daemons;  and it was  a law in our town  
that any hunter  who  had not hunted  elephant  must  not go there  to 
hunt,  for it was the abode  of wonders;  it was there  the birds  talked  
like human  beings,  and animals  bou^t  and sold  from,  and to one 
another;  where  many  trees  did not  have  roots,  but  looked  fresh  widi  
evergreen  leaves.  Mice  were  bigger  than  j^uched  rats,  and  snails  were  
bigger  that tortoises  in Igbo Olodun^re.  The gnome  and the
35






hoodlumish  spirits  were  friends;  it was there  that the strong  headed  
snakes  terrify  the hunters,  for the abode  of the head  of the entire  
snakes  in the world  was foere;  his name  was Ojola-ibinu.
'Before  my father  left home,  he performed  hunter's  magic,  for he 
had several  magical  leather-girdles  around  his waist,  and  his^  fingers  
were  filled  with the magical  rings  of the elders;24  he sacrificed  six 
cows  at our house.  My father  summoned  all the medicine  men  in the 
town  and gave them  a big party  with  lots of food.  The medidneof  
generations  filled  our  home.  For  about  six months,  he went  to and  fro, 
on account  of,thiamatter  of Igbo  Olodumare,  fpr whoever  wmt  there  
neve^  fc^e  baclc,^ey  ’always  bouriced  from  the hands  of one grioihe  
to the other.  Ha! my fattier  was an importunate  fellow  indeed;  man  
surpasses  man;  Olowo-aiye  was  very  much  a man  indeed.  The  day  on 
which  my  father  was  all packed  and  ready  to part  with  all the  relatives  
GWasiah  eventful  day:  the medicine  meh  gather^  tpgeJh^jn  therporn,  
hands  the-.etephantrhunters  gathered  together  in the perlour;.lhe  
childreri  ran up to the attic. Various  kinds  of people  were-in  the 
• Backyard,-  goatsi-andbeyond  the forecourt  of .the house,  >v,omen  ^ere  
^crying;  an ‘dimen>were  "weeping;  famous  persons  were  speechless?  and 
I [gentlemen  frowned.'Butmy  father  was  arm^  like a European  spldier  
.snnd'armouivd  "like  ran Ifa-priest;  he walked*  as if he were going  to 
owrestle, ’ dnd stood.at  attention  lihe policemen  before  their Superior  
officer.  When  it came  to his actual,  time  of departure,  he summoned
heverybpdy  inthe-housfeand  spoke  thus:  ■ -
.<-L- i'i[To4ay  is ttie dayjthat  I go to the place  .Where  the powerful  ones  
tcrthe  abode  of the  steange  beings-,  to the jblace  that  is very  dank  in 
*’my  eyes^T  wiil'leave-peace  behind;  I shall  gointQ.®^^t  trouhle,ibut  
.xfifficulty  issthe  fatherxrfitreasure;,  good-name  is better  dtan a. new  
bride; if I endure  the trials of today,  I shall'  .reap the. treasure  of 
' tomorrow;  if Ljoyfully  tetum  from  Igbo.  Olodumare,  nfiyioame  shall  
. surely  ^u^ure  in theworld.  jdy,pedpleall,*do  nothave-afow  ambition  
I forJyOurse|veSje\Iernstriye  for>4hafc  which  is.gr^Vhev'who  striyes.'-fpr  
Vthatjwhichds.gteat  and doessnot  achieve  that  which  is* great,,  shall  
-’obtain  thatwhicltisxlos€st0.that  which  is great;  but  he who.runs  after  
that which  is little;'would  not stand  in the midst  of the mighty.  He 
Who^ ’rays  for ten dandogos^  if he does  not receive  ten dandbgos,  
hewould  receive  eightdandogos/he  who  prays  for six trousers,  if he 
■'’.'does  not receive  six trousers;  he would  receive  five trousers,  but he 
. -who-prays  for one trouser  from  God , if he receives  two, that fellow  
needs  to be grateful  to God,'the  (heavenly)  King.^^  I truly  see that  all 
' of you  do frown,  but  my  niindisas  strong  as pebbles  by ^le seashore.
I ammot-iincertain,  foE.progress  is far from  him who is uncertain.  I 
-shall  never  be of divided  mind'as  I go; by ttie grace.of  the Lord,  the 
(heavenly)  jCini^  who  created  jne,  J shall  surely  come  back  home.-A  
•’’pessimistioperson  ttainks-ihat  heds  going  to die in die morning,  and 
" inrl«»ipd  he dies.atndon'if  he had  be^a  little  optimistic,  he might  have  
•. '• t'.rc .'-rtoap .e.,.mobn)O  c.-gt .. .
36
- . ■ - ,  — . -  






had  about  three  more  days  to spend  in the world.  A person's  mind  is 
his  priest.  Let  me go now;  greet  every  hqdy  at home;  tike  care  of things  
irthfiy  absence.  Here goes the jnan;^^nnounce^tojdie  world  that a 
powerfulman;goes  to'the,place  where  onlyAe  powerful  ones  go. Let 
no^ohe;  old or young,  and the gentlemen,  think  that the pilgrim  to 
Igbo  Olodumare  would  not come  back  again;  let all the peace-loving  
people  in the world  be expecting  the powerful-one
'Thus  Olowo-aiye  spoke,  and  he headed  towards  Igbo-Olodumare,  
and his eyes  were-changed;  fliey  were  red indeed.  As he was getting  
too hasty  to be on his~way, ’he almost  forgot  one important  medicine  
that  was  in a little  gourd,  and,  if he did  not  take  that  with  him,  it would  
have  been  (hfficult  for him to find  his way  to Igbo Olodumare.  The 
feather  of a blue touraco,^^  the feather  of  an ahiko^^  the feather  of a 
ground  hombill;and  the feather  of a red parrot,  were  the ingredients  
with  which  the tiny gourd  of medicine  was covered,  and there  was 
blood  around  it. It belonged  to my  grandfather;  he in turn  got it from  
the guts  of one  python,  for it was  even  before  w,e were  bom,  that  many  
people  had been  hunters  in our family.  Our grandfather  to whom  I 
referred  a while  ago was  the very  first  person,  of all foe people  in our 
town,  who  went  to foe Forest  of Four  Thousand  Daemons.  It was at 
that  time  that  he killed  foe python  of which  I speak,  in which  he found  
that tiny gourd  of medicine..If.one  recited  an incantation  on this tiny 
gourd  of medicine,  and one mentioned  foe name  of foe place  one 
wished  to go, foe wind  would  start  blowing,  and  foose  feafoers  would  
follow  foe desired  direction.  Look,  my friend,  if I had not forgotten  
those  incantations,  I would  have  taught  you  because  it was  not more  
than  twenty-five  sentences;  after  teaching  you  foe incantation,  I would  
haye  given  you the tiny gourd  of medicine  too.
'Igbo Olodumare  was far away  indeed;  it was about  two days  
journey  to our home  town.  There  were  .other  jungles  along  foe way,  
and also big rivers  that  were  flowing  and making  a rushing  noise  as 
they  were  vigorously  pouring  on foe rock.  There  were  various  kinds  
of shrubs  on foe way:  good  and bad ones.  Hundreds  of thorny  trees  
created  barriers  whenever  people  tried  to pass  forough  foe forest;  and 
foe strong-headed  debris  converged  wifo foe troublesome  liana,^^  
which  crawled  around  all kinds  of trees  and foe debris  was falling  on 
one  as one  was  passing  by. The  animals  did  not  let people  rest;  foe red 
monkeys  and  foe baboons  and  foe long-tailed  monkeys  were  hopping  
from  one tree  to foe other.  Their  eyes  were  like  foose  of humanbeings;  
so were their  fingers  as well. In fact, a monkey  is very much  like a 
human  being;  it seems  as if foe Creator  made  ,them  tn  be-relatives  to 
each  other.  There  were  various  things  irrfo&  wilderness.  There  were  
big trees  and  tall palm  trees  wifo  lots of parasites;  some  animals  were  
living  on big palm  trees;  foe birds  wifo  pointed  beaks  were  fond  of 
foe’neck  of palm-  trees,  for.  foey nevef  wanted-to  miss  foe delicious  
' kernels;  squirrels-trever  wanted  to part,  with  loot  aerials,,  aod fo^ long






thin snakes  were looking  for frees in hidden  places;  cobras  were  
hiding-under  ’ftie grass,  and the python  was living  by the seashore,  
and a great  number  of  poisonous  sn^es  loved  to live  in tfieir  holes;  
snails  loved  swampy  areas,  and  tortoises  cherished  canopied  tree;  die 
larkheeled  cuckoo  flew  in abeyance,  but the dove  flew  about  in lofty  
places;  (it) stands  like a rooster  in die forest  and tells time to the 
hunters.  The trees  that  have  long  fallen  had  no more  power  in them;  
mushrooms  were  growing  around  their  stumps.  The  paths  of animals  
differed  from  one another:  the rat's  path  was narrow  and dean,  but 
the wart-hog's  path  was  very  wide  indeed.  My friend,  it is better  seen  
than  be told;  you know  all kinds  of difficulties  in the forest,  and  my 
father  saw all those  difficulties  with  his eyes  as he was  going  on his 
way  to Igbo  Olodumare;  yet  these  things  that  Ihave  adurnbrated  were  
nothing  compared  with  what  he experienced  when  he got to Igbo  
Olodiunare.
‘ 'My  father  spent  the  first  night  on the  road,  and  by noon  the second  
day,  he v^as  almost  at his destination.  My  father  reached  the  forest  that 
was  next  to Igbo  Olodumare;  the name  of the forest  was  the  Jungle  of 
Silence,  for it was  the most  silent  place  under  the heavens.  There  was 
only  one gnome  in this  jungle;  he was hotter  than the thimder  from  
the sky.  The gnome  never  let anybcxly  cross  over  to Igbo  Olodumare.  
He gave  the hunters  a lot of trouble,  although  he was  not  taller  than  
two feet.  He Jived  under  .an ant-hill.  He was  a short  devilish  daemon;  
he carried  a bundle  of whips  around  everyday  of his life. When  my 
father  reached  tills forest,  everything  was  deadly  silent;  all the leaves  
on the trees  bowed  their  heads  down-ward,  one did not touch  the 
other;  if was  just  as if there  were  no wind  at all; all the branches  of the 
trees  stood  strai^t  up like  an army  before  a supreme  commander;  the 
liana looked  siddy  where  they coiled  themselves;  even  the animals  
had deserted  the place  as tiieir  place  of abode;  the birds  had  headed  
towards  other  places  of their  choice.  All the living  tilings  looked  like 
a debtor  absorbed  in thou^t  about  his debt.  The whole  forest  was.  
very  silent  as if someone  was  bereaved  and  friends  and  acquaintances  
kept  silent  around  him.  You  see,  my  friend,  since  my father  was  alone  
witii  this  little  daemon  (which  lived  luider  the ant-hill)  in this  vicious  
forest,  his crossing  over  must  be very  difficult  indeed.  After  my father  
had  wandered  around  this big  jungle  for some  time,  he and this little  
daemon  under  the ant-hill  saw each other  face to face. It was an 
eventful  day indeed,  when  they  finally  faced  each  other.  An accident  
met witii  trouble;  sigidi  (graven  image)  met  witii  daemon;  two lions  
met  face to face.  The  name  of this daemon  is Esu-kekere-ode,-^!  he did 
not wear  a gown  nor put on trousers;  he never  wore  cap nor pants;  
the hard-headed  fellow  covered  his bottom  with  leaves.  He had  only  
one eye, and tiiat eye was as around  as a large  rounded  moon.  Esu-  
kekere-ode  had  no nose  at all because  his eye  was  abnormally  big; his 
mouth  was  as wide  as the palm  of a hand;  his teetii  wer~  Uke those  of






a lion; those  teeth  were  as red  as thbse  of  a lion  that  had  just  eaten  
raw meat.  Hair covered  the daemon's  body  like clothes;  his entire  
body  was like that of European  dog;  and.  tfiere  was a. big moon^  at 
thecentre  of his head.  As  hehad  the  load  of  whipsupon  his  shoulder,  
so  was  a big  terrifyingbaghung  around  his  neck.  The  bag  was  soaked  
in blood,  and  lords'  feathers  stuck  around  it, and'there  were  various  
medicines  tied by the side  of die bag: tiny gourds  and snake's
bones  and parrot's  red feather,  the feathCT  of die blue ^bap^cos^  the 
feather,of  an aluko  widv  pieces  of cowries  (an ancient  ihoney)  und 
various  horns  of animals,  small and big ones, and die hmns  of 
antelope  that was plucking  okra on the form,  with the father  of 
partridge  that was  wandering  around  in die jungle;  all these  things  
converged  on the^bag  of this litde  daemon  (that  was  living  under  the 
ant-hill),  the one  whose  name  was  Esu-kekere-ode.
"A.S he was approaching  his steps  were  jingling  because  of die 
chain  of snail  shells  diat  had  been  cracked  into pieces,  each  piece  as 
round  as a shilling and  they  were  tied  togedier  like  beads  that  the 
daemon  coiled  around  his ankles  up to his very  knees;  so were  the 
steel rings  vdiich  were  on all his fingers  that were  ds black  as die 
fingers  of a woman  who  works  with  indigo.  Ha! I tell you, a terrible  
daemon  was the little gnome  of die ant-hill,  whose  name  was 
Esu-kekere-ode.-
"When  my father  appeared  on diis side and he emerged  on that 
side,  they  bodi  halted  and  began  to stare  at each  other  because  when  
an elephant  meets  an elephant,  trees  must  fall,  one  upon  the other.  He 
was approaching  my father,  and my father  was al^ going  to fneet  
him; and when  they were about  to meet each other,  both of them  
stopped  and  started  to gaze  at each  other  again;  something  was  indeed  
about  to happen.  It was Esu-kekdre-ode  that spoke  first;  he opened  
his big mouth  and  said:
"Who  are you?  What  are you?  What  do you  amount  to?  What  have  
you become?  What  are you wordi?  What  are you looking  for?  What  
do you want?  What  are you looking  at? What  are you seeing?  What  
are you thinking?  WhaV  s matter  with  yoi^?  Where  are yoiT  coming  
from?  Where  are you going?  Where  are you hiking?  Where  are you 
walking?  Answer  me, son of a man, answer  me in one sentence!  
Certainly  you  are in trouble  today;  you  have  climbed  the tree  beyond  
its top;  you  have  fallen  from  die top into  the well;  youhave  consumed  
a poison  unexpectedly;  you have planted  your peanuts  on an 
unweeded  farm.  You  aphasic  man;  don't  you know  that  a lion  and  an 
antelope  do not see eye to eye, and  that  a leopard  and  a cow  are never  
friends,  and that  on die day that  a cat sees a rat, that  is the  end  of the 
raf s life?  You  saw  me, I saw  you;  I was  advancing  and  you  were  also 
approaching;  you never  even  took  to your  heels;  you were  walking  
with  impunity  before  me.  Were  you  not  afraid?  Were  you  not  scared?  
H* < /t you  heard  about  me?  The skulls  of those  who  were  stronger






than  you are in my cooking  pan;  their  spinal  chords  are in the comer  
( of my room.  I use the chests  of dumb  people  as chairs  in my house.
"I am the little daemon  that lives in the ant-hill;  my name is 
Esu-kekere-ode.  There  was an outbreak  of fighting  between  me and 
someone  in heaven,  and they  said I was dishonest  to God, the King;  
that was why strange  creatures  decided  that I should  definitely  get 
out of heaven.^  I left heaven  and headed  towards  the abyss;  thus I 
lived  in the midst  of the dead  under  the ground  for  onehundred  years,  
and I learned  all kinds  of wisdom  from  them;  since  then  that I have  
been  convinced  that  of all the kinds  of death  that  children  of the world  
die, only a few are natural  deaths  from  heaven.  The children  of the 
world  are always  the architect  oif their  own  fate:  stupidity  kills  people,  
overworking  kills some unexpectedly,  laziness  kills some  
unexpectedly,  greed  sends  them  to a sudden  grave,  covetousness  kills 
some  people  untimely,  sometimes  a hypocrite  looks  for a way  to kill 
another  person,  but unfortunately  for him,  instead  of that  person,  he 
ends up killing  himself  — he thus finds himself  in the vault of
• heaven?^  Sometimes  a malicious  friend  seeks  to kill his friend,  hut
instead  of his friend,  he gets himself  killed.  Sometimes  a malicious  
friend  seeks  to kill his friend,  but  instead  of his friend,  he gets  himself  
killed.  Sometimes  a rich  person  seeks  to kill the poor  one,  but  instead  
of that person,  he finds  hirrtself  in the vault  of heaven;  sometimes  a 
not-very-important  person  seeks  to kill a very  important  person,  but 
instead  of that person,  he finds  himself  in the vault  of heaven.  A 
nonsensical  person  plays  with death;  an extravagant  person  plays  
with  death;  an aimless  wanderer  plays  with  death;  a pompous  person  
plays  with death;  a treacherous  person  plays  with deafii.  For what  
reason?  Because  the Creator  is looking  at his creature  and what  he 
does  with  his hands,  as well  as his going  to and  fro in the midst  ofhis  
fellow  creatures;  and the Creator  would  not leave the creature,  
unrewarded  according  to his works,  no matter  how many  changes  
might  occur  either  here  on fire earth  or in heaven.
"I am file daemon  of the ant-hill  whose  name  is Esi^-kekere-ode.  
When  I left the abode  of the dead  ones,  I came  to the Jungle  of Silence  
and made  the ant-hill  my home.  Here  in the jungle  I foimd  animals;  
it was here that I found  birds;  it was here that I found  spirits;  but I 
drove  all of them  far away  to the extent  that  I was  left alone  without  
any  neighbour,  and  have  been  eating  leaves  in the forest  (since  flien).  
But today  since  I have  found  you  unexpectedly,  I am thankful  that  my 
maker^^  has  brought  something  to me,  for  it has  been  a long  time  since  
I have  eaten  human  flesh.  After  I have  killed  you, I will enjoy  your  
flesh  for about  three  days.  I will cook  okra  soup  with  your  skull;  I will 
prepare  spinach  soup  with  your  chest  meat,  and your  bottom's  meat  
will enrich  my pepper  soup.  I shall  keep  tiie rest  of your  meat  in my 
house  in the anthill.  Ha! I am grateful  to God  today;  I ,am  grateful  to 
all the daemons  today;  I am grateful  to all the spirits  in the world;  I
I
I
40






am  grateful  to the luck  charms  in my pocket,  and  I am grateful  to, that 
Very important  gnome,  Alade-Igbo,"^  I am grateful  to the daemon  
\yho  is the,  coordinator  of the ant-hil^s,  who  is also my relative.
xfljius  had the gnome  spoken  to my fattier;  and my fattier  also 
<f§pii^  to him  as a powerful  man  should  reply  fp a powe^l  one.  He 
looked  at Esu-kekereode,  a^s a hoodlumish  lady  would  look at hfer 
husband,  arid said to him: "He  who  tries to catch  rain  water  with  a 
sifter  is merely  deceiving  himself;  he who  stands  on ttie train's  track  
will find himself  in the vault  of heaven.  An adult  who sees a snake  
md  does  not  take  to his heels  is only  hurrying  himself  to his grave;  an 
apimal  that underrates  a hunter  shall sleep in the oven; he who  
depends  upon  diabolic  medicine  for his life would  be subjected  to 
povg^,'^®  the daemon  that  imderrates  rpe would  fall headlong  from  
one  heaven  to the other.  I, the very  man  (of all men),have  thus  spoken;  
today  I will tell you, daemons  of Igbo Olodumare,  that when  the 
.Creator  created  every,thing  in the universe.  He made  man  the  head  of 
thepiJjl.  I want  you to Imow  today  that pride  is the beginning  of 
' destruction:  it is the beginning  of (man's)  fall; it is against  the law of 
man,  and it is different  from  the plan  of God  the King.  Thus,  ifistead  
.of you eating  me up, I will give  your  flesh  to the beasts  of the forest,  
and  you  shall  become  a prey  for the birds  that  fly  on the trees.  It is true 
that  you  have  come  in contact  with  people,  and  you  have  been  making  
their place  of repose  your  pot of soup,  but Esu-kekere-ode,  do not 
forget  that  one chicken  surpasses  another  chicken,  one  goat  surpasses  
another  goat;  one sheep  surpasses  another  sheep;  one bird  surpasses  
another  bird;  man  is (certainly)  greater  than  man,  a hunter  is greater  
than  a hunter.  I tell you  this,  I surpass  them  all; I do not  belong  to their  
'rank;  I am ranked  only with  their.father.  You are simply  pompous,  
you.  little  gnome  of the ant-hill,  you Esmkekere-ode;  I am above  the 
rank  of your great,  great  grandmother;  who are you?  You foolish  
thing;^  you are in trouble  today;  come,  let us jump  op each  other ."
You  see,  my  friend,  my  father  had  hardly  finished  his speech,  when  
both  of them  collided,  and  the fight  was  a very  fiery  fight;  it was  a man  
against  a gnome;  the entire  forest  became  extremely  noisy;'  
Esu-kekere-ode  was  very  strong,  and so was  Olowo-aiye,  my father,  
ttie very  man  of all men;  he who  was  in the world  and  was  ■wrestling  
with  a pilgrim  from  ttie  heavpn  of akeji.^^  At ttie beginning  of ttie fi^t,  
Esu-kekere-ode  tried  to find a placa  to get hold  of my Other's  waist,  
back  him up against  a thorny  tree, lift his legs on his shoulder,  and 
throw  him in the debris,  and  begin  to punish  the poor  man;  but this 
was very  difficult  (for him);  as he was thinking  about  doing  so, my 
fattier  had  other  thoughts.  He was  kxiking  for a way  to lift the  horrible  
gnome  off the ground,  over  the crown  of his head,  and  throw  him  far 
away,  so that  Esu-kekere-ode  would  bounce  from  one heaven  to the 
ottier.  However,  these  things  were  impracticable,  for as he  was  putting  
up a fi^t  like  a lion,  so was  Esu-kekere-ode,  like  an elephant;  and  the
41






air was  filled  wifli  dust;  and the ground  began  to shake  (under  their  
feet)  —-the vibration  produced  by their  feet was greater  than that of 
ten men.  The  faces  of both  of them  were  wild;  they  clung  to each  other  
as a creeping  plant  would  to a tree in the forest;  they were bofh  
breathing  heavdly  like a hunter's  dog. It was a big day for the little  
gnome  of the ant-hill,  whose  name  is Esu-kekere-ode.
After  a while,  this horrible  gnome  jumped  on my fettier  about  the 
middle  of his body;  as my father  was  trying  to get hold  of his feet,  he 
jumped  on  his shoulder;  whenhe  got  hold  of my  fattier's  neck,  he gave  
him a terrible  slap on file ear with  all his might.  My father  was so 
furious  t^the  began  to push  the gnome  against  a thorny  tree.  This  
caused  trie gnome  to scream  in a low voice,  and he quicldy  jumped  
down  from  my father's  shoulder.  After  this,  my father  got  hold  of his 
feet near  the ankles,  so strongly  that  he lifted  Esu-kekere-ode  above  
his pate; then he tossed  him forward  wifii anger,  with  the hope  of 
breaking  file horrible-headed  tiling's  skull,  but this was impossible!  
As my father  looked  in front  of him, this creature  was still standing  
in front  of him,  laughing  and looking  at my father  as if the fight  had 
just  begun.
"After  all of this,  my father  became  fed up, so he stuck  his hand  in 
his pocket,  looking  for medicine. As he was searching  for it, he 
found  a flute fliat had been in our family  for generations,  and he 
quickly  brought  it out; he began  to blow  the flute,  and the sound  of 
the flute  pervaded  tiie entire  vicinity.  It sang  about  how  God  w^  tiie 
originator^^  of human  victory,  and that He owns  everything  in the 
world  and in heaven:  the human  possessions  and the treasure  
(concealed)  under  the ground,  the one on the surface  of the waters,  
and the one in the air. He also sang  about  how  God  the King  could  
not  be impeded  — ■ the Creator  does  whatever  He wants  to do—and 
that nobody  can hinder  God the King  from  promoting  whoever  he 
wants  to promote  (in life),  and  that  no villain  can  hinder  God  the King  
from  uplifting  people.  My fafiier's  flut&sang  ttiat  a villain  gets  up in 
tiie morning,  looking  as.green  as fresh  plantain  planted  by the river  
side,  and  by noon,  he becomes  as dry  as firewood,  and  in the evening,  
he was  completely  burnt.A  deceitful  person  tells  his friend  that  he 
has clothed  himself  with  doth,  but  when  a truthful  person  sees  him,  
he points  out that  he is in fact  plainly  naked.  Thus  went  the song  that 
my father  mournfully  played  on the day ttiat  he and  the little  gnome  
' of tiie ant-hill  met  face-to-face.
The song  was  echoed  throughout  the forest,  and  tiie flute  sounded  
better  than  a king's  flute.^  Since  the song  was a mournful  song,  the 
gnome  could  npthelp  its penetration  into  the nook  and  crannies  of his- 
brain;  a trutiiful  person  suppresses  a deceitful  one;  Esu-kekere-  ode's  
head  hung  down  like the leaves  of a banana  tree; tiie gnome  of the 
ant-hill  stared  downward  in ccMiterriplation;  the little  creature  opened  
his mouth  and said:
42






"The  children  of men have changed  — wise'ones  are'now  'beihg  
found  among  them;  it has  been  a long  time  since  I have  made  this  place  
my place  of abode,  and nobody  has ever tried  to change  my mind  
before,  but since  God  created  me, I have  noted  that a patient  person  
has never,  and will nev^r  be disappointed,  except  the one who  
•weakens  his patience  with stupidity;  as from today>.I.will  never  
ill-treat  men anymore;  I will never  lay rfry frustration  on men,  
neither  will  I frown  on the animals,  and  I vownot  to ill-treat  the shrubs  
in the forest  anymore,  for your  words  have  changed  my heart;  I shall  
not behave  as though!  was 'country-bred'  anymore.  But don't  ydu 
ever think  that I said all that  I have  said  out of sheer  weakness,  for if 
you  have  that thought,  then  you have  not understood'me  at all; then  
you would  be like a person  who takes  a sheep  for a cow, a car for a 
bicycle,  and  mistakes  the world  for heaven.  A cool-headed  person  sees 
fight and stays away,  and'a  fool thinks  he is weak,  but when  the 
patient  person  starts  fighting,  everybody  begins  to fall like the trees  
(in the forest).  I am grateful  to you for the mdancholic  song  that  you 
sang,  die song  that reminded  nye of the One who created;  if it were  
not because  of the song  that  you sang,  I would  have  fought  you three  
days, for I have fought  like that before;  I might  have fought  six 
months;  I have  fought  for as long  as three  months;  I have  also  fought  
a fight  which  lasted  for a whole  year  before  even  I, the little  gnome  of 
the ant-hill,  the one whose  name  is Esu-kekere-ode."-
Thus  did the gnome  Speak,  and  my father  was  not angry  anymore;  
they  shook  hands  with  each-other,  and  everyone  went  on his way . But 
as it is with  our culture/  fighting'never  goes  without  the fighter  being  
hurt, whether  the one invdlved  in the fight  was at fault  or not. My 
father  bumped  against  a tree/And  tore  his hunter's  bag; he lost his 
important  medicine,  and his flute got broken.  Also,  Esu-kekere-ode  
was wounded,  lost two of his teeth,  and orie ring;  one of his legs  was 
broken,  and  he w^ limping  around  like a guinea-worm  victim.  This  
is why the wise people  liken  fighting  to poison,  and they run away  
from  it everyday.  Fighting  does  not behove  a person:  it is just like a 
fish bone (in' a human)  throat.  But a foolish  person  uses a lamp  to 
search  around  for fighting.
Olowo-aiye  went  on his way and continued  his journey,  he and 
God the King with him. When  he was about  to pass through  the 
wilderness  of silence,  he came  to a little  river  which  was  both  flowing  
and  shining,  which  was  very  cool  indeed;  my  father  stopped  there  and 
took a bath after  which  he ate a red banana^  and drank  the water  
from  the water-bottle  in his pocket;  and  he was  relieved,  like a person  
who  owed  two  pounds  but  was  lucky  enough  that  an opportunity  to 
earn  ten pounds entered  his house.
It was  not more  than  ten minutes  after  my father  left the river  and 
had departed  from  the Jungle  of Silence  when  he came  to a field  that 
■'.'/as  wide  and  beautiful.  The  grass  ’’ - was very  cool  and  appealing.
43






like the front  yard-ofa"  white  man's,  house.'  Little  trees  were-greater  in 
number  than big trees, and each trpe.  that was in the midst  of the 
surroimding  was very beautiful*  indeed.  They all stood tall ^d 
straight.  The stems  bf some  of thern  were  wjjite,  an4  scirpe,\ygre,bla<;k;  
the body  of some  of theny  were  like a. rainbow  in the sky, which  had 
both  dark  and  brigh>colours.  There  was a big path that  went  straight  
.forward,  which  meant  that the path-that  pay,father  was following  
-became  bigger.  Big stQpes  were-ljned  pp on both  the left ^d  the right  
f sides  of the p^th.*  Besides  these  stones,  someone  had  planted  little  trees  
all along  the road, all wljich  bloprped^Vand  were very pretty.  My 
'.friend,  the death that kills one's contejpaporary  speaks,  to-one-in  
. proverbial  language.  V^hen  Oloworaiye  saw  these  tilings,  he too knew  
that  he was  getting  close  to Igbp  Qlqdpmare.  My father  got ready,  and 
adjusted  his pants.  , . ,. . .
"The  wise  and the stupid  look alike  at the time  of enjoyment,,  but 
' the  wise  comes  out plainly  at the.top  at a time  of tribulatipn.  My .father  
behaved  like a wise  man  at this time;  he gently  put  downed!  .tiie tfiings  
that were ’ in his hands;  he went under  one of the trees there; he 
grovelled  flatly  on the ground  before  God,  and said:
"Thou  God the King  who  created  me. Thou  the Omnipotent  God,  
who  made  Igbo  Olodumare,  Thou  who  art  wonderful,  who  made,all  
the wonderful  tilings.  Thou  who  created  all the hunters  in the world,  
the time has now come  that I want  you to-stand  behind ’me. Some  
people  came  into the  world,  but when  they  left the world,  their  names  
went  with  them;  those  people  walked  through  this world  just like a 
snake that crawled  on a .rock, for we never saw their footprints  
anymore.  But  some  others  camp  into this,  wo  rid, anti when  they-left  
the  Avorid,  their  bad names  stayed.  behind-.them;4hose  people  were  
like a black  stain  o'rva  white  cloth,  and when  the washerman  washed  
the white  cloth  to the extent  that it was  almost  torn,  instead  of getting  
- rid of the black  stain,  it was  justfshpwing  all the more):  it became  more  
conspicuous  on the white  cloth*  as the white  kept getting  whiter.  I 
adjure  thee, my-Creator,  .do not make  me like those^  I. am humbly  
pleading  today  that it might  please  thee  (to make  me) like those  who  
came  to the world  and  were  like the moon;  they  were  benefiting  from  
posterity;  their  names  remained  .behind  them.  As, I am going,tpday,  
let it please  thee that I might  come  back like a man,  to the end that 
when  my days  are spent  and I am dead,  people  might  not ask them ­
selves,  'Was  the man  ever  bom?"'
'Olowo-aiye  said no more than this, and the Omnipotent  God  
heard  him from  heaven;  for there  is no man  like an angel;  neither  is 
there  any on whom  one should  rely like God  the King.
'My father  got ready  and kept  going,  whistling  and walking  like a 
warrior.
'It was  not too long  after  this, when  he looked  and saw in front  of 
him, two ladies  who  were  following  the same  trail  {coming  towards
44






him),  clapping  their  hands  rhythmically,  just as it is customary  with  
most  worsen?®  ft seemed  as if ^ese  tv/o women  had made  the place  
their home;-they  were enjoying  themselves,  in the forest  and were  
being  modish  as if they  were  in the he^t  of the city. One  of them  was 
light in complexion,,  stout. tall as she seemed  as if she were  
married; but-the  second-one  was  neither  very  fat hor tall; she had  a 
dark  complexion,  and  her teeth  wete  as white  as a new ear of com?^  
They  were  both specimens  of beauty.  Their  speech  was like that of 
noblq  p^ple,  and,  their steppings  like those of people  whose  lives  
have  been  shattered  by wprdliiiess.53  ’ , .
"When  ^ey,  met- rn^y-father,  he-greeted  them, and they also 
responded  to him too, just as a mere  acquaintance  would  respond.  
After  this,  my father  faced  his  p\yn  way,  and they  followed  their,  own  
paths  as well. But one could  not help" wondering  how two famous  
persons  got into this jungle.  This was  why  my father  turned  back  to 
look  at them;  this was  the tune  that  the younger  ori® looked  back  too, 
and  when  both  of them  looked  at each  other,  they  smiled  at each  other,  
and each  faced  his own  way  and  went  on. The  second  time  my father  
looked  back,  this woman's  eyes  again-caught  my fattier's;  my father  
was not yet married;  he was  a bachelor;  still he managed  to continue  
on his way.  But the third  time  my father  looked  back  again,  and tins 
woman  also  looked  at him  again,  arid-my  father  smiled  and  she smiled  
as well,  and the teeth  of the beauty  were  as white  as a white-washed  
wall,  Olowo-aiye  turned  back;  the man  turned  his pate  back  from  Igbo  
Olodumare  — my father  went;  towards  the woman  <— may God  
deliver  the child-of  the worjd^  frpm  the hands  of the troublesome  
who  jauntily  tilt their  head-;ties  toward  the forehead.  • '
- "When  my father  was walking,  toward  this woman  the woman  
stopped,  but the other  woman  walked  a little  bit ahead,  and she also 
stopped,  standing  aloof  from the-other  one, for when  a man and a 
woman  want  to talk  privately,  the third  person  is always  a hindrance  
to them.  Look  out, my friend;  be very careful  in your  life when  you 
go with  your  neighbour  to his fiancee;  think  before  you get into their  
discussion,  for if you do no.t, it would  seem  like a stain  on a white  
cloth,  and if they smile  at you on their  faces,  that does  not mean  that' 
.they are not saying  right from the comer  of their  hearts:  'This fool 
doesn't  let us enjoy  our flirting  at all.'
"When  my  father  got to the woman,  he greeted  her: 'Is your  home  
at peace?  Is your  body  in sound  health?  I hope  there's  no problem.'  
. -She also answered  him  very  appropriately.
, After  her response,  this woman  spoke  with  a smile,  on her face; 'It 
sjeems  as if I know  you from  somewhere.'  -
My father  also  replied  and said,  'It looks  that  way  to me, too. Is the 
house  at-the  back  of our house  your  house?'
'Yes,  it is true,  there  is a blacksjni  th's  house  at the  back  of our  house,  
and there  was a girl, a witch  who  had lived  there  before  Olowo-aiye
45






started  going  about  tfie hunter's;  forest,  and  it has been  long  since  my 
father  had seen  her. So the girl had  left the house,  she and her'older  
sister,  and  they  had  made  Igbo  Olodumare  their  place  of abode!  It was 
when  my father  asked  hose  questions  that  he matter  became  clear  to 
her. The girl responded  and said,
"Truly,  I am the girl whose  name  is Ajediran^^  who  lived  in the 
blacksmith's  house.  It was a fight  that ensued  one day  which  made  
the people  in our  house  tell lies against  us, saying  tf^t  we were  the 
ones  who  killed  and  ate their  children;^®  besides,  at the time  hat  I am 
speaking  about,  my older  sister  arid I did not know  witchcraft.  The 
people  in this world  simply  decided  to give  us a name  hat  did  not  fit 
us. Before  he end of three  months,  everybody  throughout  our town  
believed  hat my older  sister  and I were  witches.  How stupid  can 
people  be? If two or three  people  say something,  he rest  seem  not  to 
think  for hemselves  anymore,  and hey too start  saying  what  hey  
had  not seen  wih  heir  own.  eyes.  That  was  how  men  gave  my olds  
sister  and  me  a name  that  did  not  befit  us. After  all was  said  and  done,  
we were  exasperated  enough,  so hat we went  to learn  witchcraft,  
thus,  in our  exasperation,  we turned  ourselves  into  witches  from  hen  
until  this  very  day.  This  is he way  some  live heir  lives  in this world,  
hey are like stumbling  blocks,  and hey (he people)  would  accuse  
him  of behaving  falsely  until  that  person  would  decide,  saying,  since  
people ’^ have  said  that  he did'hat  which  he did  not  do, it is better  for 
him to really  do it; this is one of he beginnings  of he (down)  fall of 
he children  that  God  has created  to live on this earth.
"You  man  of Valour,  after  my older  sister  and I became  witches,  
we daunted  he people  because  we killed  and  ate boh  old  and  young,  
and we killed  important  people  in he scx:iety.  At least,  this matter  
angered  God he King, for even if he children-of-he-world  had 
behaved  foolishly  before,  so have  we behaved  in a more  stupid  and 
more  monkey-like  manner  (today).  In he morning,  one day an old 
witch  came  to block  our way  in our (own)  house,  and his particular  
witch  was tougher  han  we were;  this vicious  creature  came  to pick  a 
fight  wih  us, she drqve  us away  from  (home)  right  to he (very)  Igbo  
Olodumare.  I will never  forget  this matter  for my entire  life, for if it 
were  not because  of his (event)  I would  have found  he man who  
would  marry  me. For this reason  I strongly  appeal  to you, you 
handsome  man;  do not think  of me as a contemptuous  person  for 
asking  he question  hat I am about  to ask now.  I want  you to know  
that a bad custom  of he children  of men  does  not allow  a woman  to 
choose  he husband  whom  her soul desires;  it is he men  who  have  
he right  to ask women  to marry  hem.  If a woman  likes  a mail  and 
wants  to marry  him, it is always  difficult  for her to tell him.^®  This  
custom  of the children  of men  punishes  a part  of the children  of men,,  
and  if a man  sees  a snake  and  a woman  kills  hav  snake,  as long  as he 
snake  does  not escape,  it is not against  (any  natural)  law.^®  I want  it
46






-i—to be crystal  dear  to you that it a,woman  likes  a man  and she shows  
her love  to the man,  this does  riot violate  the (natural)  law..  Countless  
people  say that  a woman  who  makes  the  first  move  to court  a man  is 
a wayward  woman,  and before  a woman  could  do such  a thing,  the 
fire (of  Tove)  at-the  bottom  of her heart  must  have  been  stronger  than  
a fiery  furnace.  In short,  you powerful  man,  you are not among  fire 
unenlightened  ones.  I like  you  very  much;  I want  you to be the fattier  
of my home;® ’ I want  to be your  wife,  so we would  both  be compa ­
nions  together.'
"Look  at me, my friend!  The amazing  thing  in this story  is that  this 
sweet  speech  from  this  woman's  mouth  made  my father  taste  love  for 
the first  time  in his life.  Love  glutted  and  spilled  over  his face  like  palm  
wine  overflowing  from  the gourd;  Olowo-aiye  forgot  about  character  
■ becauseof  beauty;  because  of a shiny  face,  he forgot  all about  wisdom;  
because  of a set  of white  teeth,  he made  himself  the  husband  of a witch;  
since that day, my father  had dragged  trouble  behind  him and 
mistaken  trouble  for a woman.
"It was  about  three  months  after  this,  before  they  got married;  but 
since  they  decided  to get  married,  and  my  fattier  had  hung  his hunting  
bag on his shoulder  and put his machete  back  into its scabbard  and 
turned  his face towards  the road  to Igbo  Olodumare,  the woman  had. 
followed  him, she and her older  sister  with whom  she had been  
walking  about.  In the end, ft. was the king of Igbo Olodumare  that 
married  them.^ ’ You  will  hear  about  that  story  later  . When  these  two 
women  first  followed  my fattier,  they  thought  he would  turnback  in 
a short  time;  they did not know  that  he redly  meant  to hunt  in Igbo  
Olodumare.  But  after  they  had  walked  for a while,  the woman  asked.
'Where  are We really  going?"
My father  answered  and  said,  'To Igbo  Olodumare.'
Again,  the woman  asked,  'What  are  you going  to do there?'  
My father  replied,  and said,  'I am going  to hunt.'
This  woman  answered  again  and  said,  'What  do you  rely  upon?'
My father  also answered  and said, 'I rely on a gun, I rely on a 
machete,  I rely  on medicine;^^  and  I rely  on the heavenly  King.'^®
After  ttiis the woman  answered  again  and said, 'Have  you ever  
been  to Igbo  Olodumare?'
My father  answered  too and said, 'I have never  been to Igbo  
Olodumare,  but  I slave  heard  about  it.'
This  was the point  that they  had reached  when  the older  sister  of 
the woman  answered  and said:
'You  young  man,  Igbo  Olodumare  is very  dangerous;  it is the home  
of accident;  it is the Forest  of Sorrow;  if you are not careful,  you will 
regret  your  going  ttiere;  but if yowwill  take advice,  you will have  a 
good  name  in the future;  no childri^  of men  go there  ajid come  back  
(again).  But since  ttie CpeAfor^  has made  it possible  for you to run 
into  us, you will go b&K  (home  again)  if you  will  listen  to us.
.. - * - --- -Al.. -----  - ------- .*• j






"Before  you get into the forest  itself.  I'm afraid  of the gatekeeper,  
for he is a very  bad gnome;  his name  is Anjonnu-iberu.  He always  
carries  a big book  in his hands'(the  book)  in which  all the sins of the 
children  of the world  are written;  he has arranged  those  sins sygtema--  
tically:  the sins of murder,  falsehood,  snobbeiy,'slande ’r7'sRameless-  
ness, selfishness,  pride,  covetousness,  and all kinds  of other  awful  
sins.^^  Beyond  these,  other  sins which  seem  small  are the big ones  in 
the sight  of Anjonnu-iberu,  who  is the gate-keeper  of Igbo  Olodumare.  
(For example),  sins like a child  eating  three  (wraps)  of ek<^^  when  he 
jvas actually  told to eat only  two (wraps);  like a little  child  sent  on an 
errand  playing  on his way  (instead  of running  the errand  he was  sent);  
like a child going  to fetch water  and smashing  the gourd  on the 
ground;  like a child  wearing  some  clothing  which  was  new  yesterday  
and getting  it spoiled  today;  "like asking  a small  question  from  him 
pnly to have  him respond  by telling  lies, and while  one tries to catch  
him in one lie, he is telling  the third  one, to the extent  that it seems  
that the child  is carrying  a suitcase  filled  with lies — all these  things  
are found  in Anjonnu-iberu  (who  is the gate-keeper  of Igbo Olodu-  
mare)'s  book.
' 'Before  anybody  enters  the forest,  this gnome  will  ask  him  to swear  
.that he had never  committed  those  sins, or that he had never  denied  
them  before;  if the person  is unable  to swear,  he (Anjonnu-iberu)  will 
pull out his club and hit the person  on the head  and beat  him at the 
back  of the neck  with a stick and break  the person's  waist,  and that 
person  will become  one who  limps  around.  And  if the person  swears  
falsely  and enters  this forest,  a sixteen-eyed  lion which  is in Igbo  
Olodumare  would  devour  him. Therefore,  you Olowo-aiye,  be 
prepared  and tighten  your  belt  very  well."
As the woman  finished  this speech,  when  my father  was about  to 
respond  to her, his new fiancee  answered;  she smiled*  slightly;  she 
looked  at her older  sister  straight  in the eyes  and said,  'You,  my dear,  
older  sister,  you  who  have  been  taking  care;  of me from  my childhood,  
do not leave  me alone;  for the peace  of an older  (sister)  is that of the 
younger  (sister)  as well;  the sorrow  of the older  (sister)  is that of the 
younger  (sister)  as well;  for if relatives  stand  up against  relatives  and 
relations  poke each other's  eyes with a stick, still one's  house-mate  
would  always  be one's  house-mate.  Help  my beloved  in-this  matter  
because  he cannot  deal  with  it alone;  neither  can I by myself.  A child's  
wisdom  cannpt  stand  before  an adult's  wisdom.  As we now  go to Igbo  
Olodumare,  I would  not  be all that  frightened  if you  would  play  your  
role as an older  sister,  and if the Creator  is happy  with  my betrothed  
husband,  he will  certainly  return  home.
'Thus  Ajgdiran  spoke  and flattered  her older  sister.  According  to 
the elderly  people's  proverb,  'He who  knows  how  to wash  his hands  
shall  dine  with  the elders.'^  Her  older  sister  was  happy,  and  she ’said,  
'I am very grateful  that my own mother  gave birth to you. Some
48






■people  gb ’t tOtheirhusB  anti's  home  and  forgotall  about  theiriam'ilies;  
' tRese'afe  the parasites  without  root;  they.cannot-stand  alone  without  
leaning-against ’the tree; alid any day that the tree falls-will ’also see ’ 
' thfe end of the parftSitefs  life? (So it is with  those  people),  the day that 
(they)  begin  to-experience  some  problems  in their  husband's^  homes,  
-it would  be Very  difficult  for them  to talk to their  own  families.  Jt is 
'then that they would  hiss and begin to-cry,  shedding  tears of 
foolishness  from  their ’eyes',  and  the  sinus  of stupidity  would  begin  to 
trouble  their  nostrils,  'and they  would  begin  to experience  difficulty  
"before  they  could  eat If  is an abomination  to God that a mighty  tree 
should  forget  its rooSfthataiady  should  get to her husband's  home  
‘ aha'forget  her'heritage;  \ ;
- '* "But  you Ajediran/you  afOnot  in the category  of the foolish;  your  
■ older'sister  is important  toybu,'  and any^oimger  one who  up-lifts  the
older  one would  certainly  be lifted  up in thcfu  ture^'^  because-those  
’ whd-are  younget  arb not  blind:  they have their'eyes  to see plainly.  
’ There  are different  kinds  Of people  in the world:  there  are pompous  
’ people  in the world;'  he who does not have the money  to build  a 
, 6ne- ‘storey  building,  but gets-started  to build  a two-storey  house,  has
• put (i^on  his pate)  a hat of ignorance.  Ajediran  observed  the attitude  
with  which  God  ha'd endowed  her. Your  attitude  shall elevate  you,
• thank'you.  I too would  not behave  insultingly,  for I would  look  like 
an older  (sister)-who  behaves  like a younger  (sister}  who  has lost  her
- ^lace  and goes  after  crinspir'acy  — I shall  do all I can for you, I shall  
do all I can for your  husbahd  aUdJ-  shall  be very  prepared;  it is time;
■'let'Ui ’gb'./'  ‘ ■ '
' -'  Aftgf  thia woman-had  -finished  speaking,  she stuck  her  hand  in the 
■pdckelbf'her  sho'ftpari't  arid Brought  out one fruit; after she had 
. examined  it for a. v/hile,  she threw'it  into hef mouth.  This  was  the last
- thing ^'at my ^father  saW: he never  saw the*  Woman  anymore  (she 
■"-disappeared).  But after a* short while,  when  a fly alighted  on my
father's  little  sore  on the leg that  was  cut  by a tree  when  heWas  fighting  
Esu-kekeire-ode,  and he tried to swat that fly off, it did not move;  
-’iristeadlf  changed  into  a snake  and started  curling  around  his leg, and
• my father  had  to start  running  away.  When  this snake  changed  again,  
it became  a rat; th^ rat' changed  again,  and became  a tortoise;  the 
tortoise  changed  and became  an elephant;  and when  the elephant  
changed,  it became  the woman  who  was  the older  sister  of my father's  
wife.
She  faced  my  father  and  gave  him  some  fruit  which  was  in her  hand  
and she said, "Take  this, I have  just tried  it before  your  eyes, and it 
worked;  whenever  you are faced  with  tragedy,  put it in your  mouth,  
and  name  whatever  you  want  to change  into,  and  you  will  change  into 
that thing  immediately.'
"Olowo-aiye  thanked  this lady. Ajediran^®  also thanked  her on 
behalf  of her new lover;  after  this,  they  were  all on their  way.






"Within-a^short  time,  they  arrived  at Igbo  Olodumare,^^  but  it was 
getting  dark,  and  nooneenters  into  the  vicious  forestin  the  mid-night  
except  he who  would  not mind  to be thunderously  stricken  (by d|e 
' vicious  spirits  in flie forest),  for  various  strangecreatures  play  around  
in the middle  of die night,  both  the small  and.  the big ories:  the one
• that  has eye ’s, and  the one  Jhat  has  hone;  the one  with  two  K^ds,  and 
the one with three heads;  the one that looks  like a stnall brown
• monkey,  and,  the one with  horns  like a beast  —various  things  like
those  fill the forest  to the brim,  and  during  the mid-night,  all of them  
play  around.  Because  of fids,  my  father  and  those  women  had  to sleep  
near  a rock  until  the following-morning.  AjediranjtSold  my father  that 
she remembered  one particular  charm,  which  Was  in a pocket  of her 
undergarment;^^  it was  a type  of oil, and die took  the oil and  rubbed  
it on her new husbatid's  body and told him th^t before  five next  
morning,  he would  be a lot stronger.  v
"Indeed,  the following  morning,  my father'sbones  were  stronger  
than  those  of a gorilla;  his eyes  turned  red, (and)^my  father  became  a 
red-eyed  (man);  when  he was  flirting  with  his new  wife  and  he lightly  
hit her, she was  almost  wounded.^^  When  it was time  for them  to eat, 
. my father's  morsel  was  bigger  than  an orange,  and  he was  eating  like 
a grazing  cow.  As soon  as he finished  eating,  he got up and  hung  his 
hunting-bag  on his arm and his machete  scabbard  on his shoulder  
with  his gun, which  (scabbard)  was black  and stained  with  blood.  
Olowo-aiye  headed  to file path toward  Igbo Olodumare.  His eyes  
were  as wild  as the eyes  of a hungry  man.^  ,,
"When  they  appeared  in Igbo  Olodumare  and  could  see the town's  
gate-keeper  strai^t  ahead,  fiiese  two women  metamorphosed,  and 
became  birds,  .for this was not difficult  for them  to do: they were  
witches.  The  older  sister  flew  off and  alighted  onjthe  top of a very  big 
tree that was at the gate;  (and)  the younger  sister  who  was the bride  
alighted  on a little  tree by the roadside;  riie was  following  my faflier  
as he proceeded  along  file path.  .
."So  my  father  was  left  by  himself  as a human  being  while  his other  
playmates  were as birds;  still my father  did not worry  very  much  
about  death and.  disease;  he never  was afraid  of an imexpected  
sorrow;  he was  not  daunted  by affliction  in file forest  that  was  terribly  
dark.  Olowo-aiye  kept  going,  he, and  God  the (heavenly)  King.
"You,  my friend,  there  is a lot (more)  to say; I will not tell you the 
rest of those adversities  now. I think I will leave the rest until  
tomorrow;  it does  not behove  a man  to do more  fiian  Gcxd  has given  
him  file strength  to do. Today's  work  is enough;  expect  me very  early  
tomorrow  morning.  Good  bye.  Greet  your  wife  for me."
50






The Fight  at tlie Gate  of the iForest  of
Thus  the.n^^poke,  apd he left ttiat^day.  As H.began  to dawn  the 
secopd  day4sSaw-him  again.  We <^d not sfart^^pk^ocvtinje  on this 
secondday,  becaxise  mybrothers,  i;iy  relations  firani^y  njother's  side;  
brqughtpnejSmall  matter  to me, ^ndl^asked  to be exqused  tp attend  
to them.  After.this>my  friend  and I.waif  to thejtable,  and  ,we dined,  
.^eif-we  had  rested  ^.little  whilp  after  fooc^  we stertetLon  our : work.  
He<»ntiiiUjEd,wifti  the stpty,  andlie,^d\  ..
i 'fYpu^y  fri^d/5  yonrememberyest^pday^wh^e  we  were  in the 
story;  \yhere  my  f^^pr  frjs pyes  pn Jgbc^ipdUmme  and  went
fofth,  he and,his  be^th^,wife^w;hpmJie  met indie  fprest,  qnd  had 
been  utilizing  jthe litde  ppportr^^fh^y  h^^/ enjoying  ,tiieir  Jives  in 
the midst  oi the^tre^  and  thp paJm  f ai^,g9in'that  my,  father's
in-l^w,  -tt^e lady  .who \yas gay sister,  was also with
them.  n ■ •' ’ *. ” ’
r 'When  >my father  appeared  before  Anjpnnu-iberu,  .wjap wqs.flae  
gaterlceeper  of-Igbp  Olodumare,  ev^  he.)^ew  ^^t  he ^asbefoce  a 
very  important  gnpme..This  faiiy  wom
was  like a hunter's,  with  a pair  of short  knijckers  not  reach
turner  than  jus knfee^ of^thesew^ip  gpaked  inbl^apd  — tiiey  
yver^  blppc^-rpd  jndggd.Ple  had  ipade  a belt out-of  a f^efrom  one 
big.  tree and tipd  h te^junfi.t'is  waisf.  Moreover,  tris hair  was  bushy,  
lihe4fis.t  o^a lunatic,-and  was filled,vyith  all'kinds  of rubbish,  iln the 
mid^ejof-his,head  wgs a httle  ^le.frcm  \yWch  smoke  was coming  
Qut.Hehad  draiyn^kinds  p^thiiigA^pyer  his body,widi and 
white  povraer;7^  the  face  and  tfie  nose  of the gnome  were  like  the  walls  
p£a s^jne:  a veiy  flread^X^gtif)  jn<ieed.  Cudgel  ^d  dpb,  aJoad  of 
whips  and  nuinerousg^n^;  hunt^^bones,  ^d  anjm^'  skulls,biids'  
heaks,  apd countless  snai}-shejlgi,,w® ’^ die,-thihgs;  with ivhich  
Ajpnnu-iberu  surrpunded.hiinself.  He who jyas the-gate-keeper  of 
Iglx)  Olodurggre,  wasay|ciousfairy-(indeed)., , u
'When  my  father  came  out  from  the  south  (of the  gnome's  location).






the fairy  held  hist book  in his hands;  he was reading  it; when  he saw 
Ttiy  father,  he put  the book  aside;  he examined  his cudgel,  and  touched  
the loads  of whips;  after  he had examined  these  weapons,  he smiled  
and rested  his hands  on his hip; he advanced  forward  a little,  and 
looked  at Olowo-aiye  as he was approaching,  like a carefree  person,  
walking  like a warrior.
“Just before  my father  got to him, he bellowed  in a thund^ds  
voice,  and said to the fairy,  'Are you the Anjonnu-iberu  who i^Jjl  
gate-keeper  of Igbo  Olodumare?'
The  oAer  answered  and said,  T any J am the pne,  If,tti,e  ^^ed  rnan
^ins.  Hfe'  aiskiSilhyfathef  fo’sw^'if  Kfehad  lidtboinrHitfed  anyof  Ihose  
^-/KSdk  a't ’fniB/ ’nfy’?nffi^  lift'dp  ySuf  eyfe/'fdr  Woifds'  airg*rffledi0  
t^iigh  Jaciai ’e)ffii^siphs'7^God'S'k  ^lQ»biCih^-'^"be  ;c^i^efti^  1^, 
^afetnl,  be dareftilbifcile ’ypu*  di^afigcTyDur  felldwmah,  be^Ai^ ’ tr^ 
feth^Wag^&dni^  Whd  lisii^  to telhiiirflie  i^ldrm  df the ’^orfd  iroj 
to sin anymore,  and ^t Wai'Surprisiifg  for^iinitd  fin'd  ddtbh'that  dayjAfter  this,  my father  said,  'If you  are the gate-keeper,  open  tbfi^  door  
for me; I want  to go and  hunt;  hurry  up, I am in haste.' *
"But  Anjonnu-iberu  burst  into  laughter  and  said,  'You  really  don't  
know  what  you are in for; do you mean  you want  to enter  or what?'
.Nobody  enters  here without  swearing  in my book,  for I the 
.?^jdnftir-i^rUfWho  is'ttie  ^gat^ke'eper  dr Igbd Olodtirhafe;  I'im  hot 
jliSl ’ a’m^^dcaTb^irig  of ffie p^sehl'dge;  it has b’den'U'long'fi&i^that'T  
have  ’b^^he}d;'nfy  axels'  juil a’Tittle^fesslhii  teh* thousaftd^^SffS ’ 
Gdihfe  dVer  Kerd'Srfi^  SvyeS?  b^cffd  m6;'if  you-oommif-pefpfl^^didn  
vszill devou?'yoCtj?ahd*if^d0rdc, ’ hof S5^6ar,  you wilTbe*  sBVerely  
punish^  i-^^QlulSTSffffidb^fc^oifd  feldiiait:^  — andwheh  I hif ydu “i3n 
the back  of your  neck  wi^  a stfck;^offwiIl*knbW.wi^t'^u'S^lnTor.
'My fithd?wSs ‘^gi^,~01dwr6^aiydbell9#ed  like ffieldphanf  ^d 
sdfdV'-'Wh^ ’a/big ’dffliSftiDn  dishes  One to the ^Ouhdfsihailer  oheS  
^at^die  «]p^drftihify  6o HimB ’oh'tha^  one';^®  if it wera ’hot fof^ ’th^ 
afflication ’which  ohe exheriehces  in‘the forest  while  drte  hdh^,  you 
(p^all  ^thifigs) ’-Wdfilch  certainly  hot'daf^  to irfiderrate'  lr/6! ^^u  
^fee-i^ySd  rm ’ry/BHng  yOur  l^kjifit  pFeasei ’rO, I'll sv^e^;if  ifdOes  
not,T  shall  not swear.  If you  whip  me, I shall  whip  you as well;  if you






when  he himself  saw  that  the  behaviours  diat  he  had  rebuked  in others-  
’.were  his own  habits-too;  ftie sins that  he had  J>B^Aed-to  tibe.chSdraa  
of world  not to commit,  were the (ve«yX#ins-  he; was now  
commithng  too: the kind  of walk® ’ he forbadel^  to walk  wap
th^.]^d  of walk  he>was  walking;  the wor^  heht^fold <&ldren.  
o£ft»e  world  not to speak,  were toe (vary>worAkhe  w^  s^king.  
Shame,  came-face  to face  wito  shame,  whertnpy  fatoersaW-t&^i^-sjns  
in.die  gate-keeper's  book,  where  he listed  them  very-holdlyf ’ i
, - 'Ha! Good-for-nothing  p^ple  fill this world  to toe brim;,some  
people-  scare me; they always  .shout  about  other  people's  children  
around;  they  shout  at home,  they  shout  in toe country;  they shoubin  
toe nooks;  they shout  in a plain-and  .open  space;  they shout  in top 
living  room;  they  shout  in toe  bedroom , They  look  like  handsome  men  
in appearance  but are filled  wito thread  and tape worms  and have  
filthy  livers  and-dirty  intestines  inside.  These  do not  have  roots  at all, 
yet they  shout  toat  other  people's  roots  are not  big enough:  a parasite  
scoffs  at a liana,  an ordinary  stump  ridicules  awusa ’*’ a feather  tells  a 
rock that  it is not heavy,  yet featoer  is on- toe sUrface  of the water  
whereas  toe rock  is toe Attorn  of toe riven  The children  of toe wodd  
watch  other  people's  occiput,  but they  will  never  try to look  at theirs.  
’ My friends,  beware;  donot  sit in toe assemblage  ofthe  taleheajers,,far  
they  are lunatics;  their  fnoutos;  are as sharp  as two-edged  swords  and 
as strong  as an axe which  my father  used,  to fell trees in toe forest.  
They  always  kill people  witotoeir  mouths  they  push  others  into  toeir  
graves for what?  Because  Satan  has taken  a troublesome  chair  and 
has taken  his seat  wito  joy and has reclined  within  these  people,  and 
when  Satan  felt comfortable,  he went  and  brought  a mattress-in  there,  
and  he is sleeping  and  snoring  there.  Always  thi^rk  about  the end,  for 
God  is coming  to visit  toem;  only  it is not time  yet; it shall  all happen  
before  our eyes.  The end of a slahderer  is never  good  and his fall-  is 
always  as gr^t  as toe fall of a twelve-storey  building  which  falls aU 
* at once.  For  it is like a cloud  that  is as bright  as silver  afar  off, but  when  
one gets  near  it, it becomes  nothing.  - - >
• "You,-my  friend,  when  Olowa “aiye looked  into toe gate-keeper's  
book,  it becarhe  very difficult  for him to swear.  The matter  never
- parted  from  my  father's  mouto;  he talked  about  it until  we  were  bom-  
Since  ’toen, he had commanded  that-no  one should  slander  his 
fellowman  behindhis  back  anymore,  for norie  in tois  world  is perfect®^
- I '-But  my father  did not confess  before  the gate-keeper;  fo/ toe 
children'of  men®®  do not confess?toe  truth in' toe presence  of toe 
enemy;  after the childfenof  toe world  have  put on toe garment  of 
corruption,  toey  defend  toemselves  by putting  up toughfaces  to coVer  
up their shame;  gentle  speech*  departs  in^-man;werything-  then  
hecomes ’aired'with  chaos  (arid fitting)-..  My fatoer'put  toe?book  
dovhv  and hisaedartd^told  Ahjonnu-iberu-  toat he«had-never  sworn  
'b^ore  anypnfe chaos,  ensued/  club  on toe back  of a junatic?5  —rM
> B3.






fairy  and  a human  being  engaged  infighting:  a (big)  ev^t  was  taking  
place  in Igbo Olodumare.  Dust  invaded  the air; my father  and  faity  
gate-keeper  began  to wrestle;  my friend,  something  happened.
"All  the fairies  gathered  together,  the animals  assembW,  the birds  
gathered  together,  and the snakes  coiled  around  the trees;  for since  
this big fight started,  the bell had been rung all around  Igbo  
Olodumare  and all lands  of strange  creatures  began  to gather  
themselves  together.  They  came  to watch.  Qnlysthe  older  fairies  could  
not  come  to watch  because  of domestic  encumbrances  in their  homes.  
Still those  sent  representatives  who  would  go to give them  the news  
(of  th&fight)  . All living  tilings  with  hearts,  (witii  breath)  who  were  not 
used  to getting  out in the day came  out to watch;  for a pouched  rat 
came  out, and  we saw  an owl;  the  bat  also  came  with  the  birds.  All the 
important  animals  that  were  living  dose  to the gate  came  out  because  
of this matter;  for the lion stood  as the chairman,  and the elephant  
stood  as the vice chairman  and the leopard  was among  those  
w  etching  .But  the  fish  could  not  come,  becauto  the  ocean  was  for  away  
from  file place  of the fight,  and if a fish  gets  out  of water,  ttiat  fish is 
ready  for the heaven  of akeji^  '
'The  fight  was  a veiy  big fight  indeed,  for my  father  never  ceased  
talking  about  it until his death.  As the story  went,  Anjonnu-iberu  
almost  broke  my  father's  back  as he continued  to dash  his  back  against  
. the tree.  But  he was  not slow  (to act) either,  for he threw  the fairy  into • 
the midst  of liana  trees  too, and the thorny  poked  his feet  and cut his 
body  all around.  This fight  lasted  a long time before  it was ended,  
because  there  was no-one  . to separate  these  fighters;  besides,  those  
who  were  standing  by did not want  the figljit  to end  on time,  because  
Anjonnu-iberu  was an obstinate  person  himself,  and  he had  lost the 
respect  of all his peers.  He always  victimized  diem,  and whenever  
there  was  a fight  between  him and  his wife,  he never  listened  to arw 
one  who  tried  to stop  the quarrel;  (for  that)  he has  been  given  a name: ” 
an obstinate  person  wears  an ignominious  garment;  he who  fights  and 
gets people  like us to stop it, must  realize  that  we do it just because  
we love  him  (and  nothing  else).® ’ Anjonnu-iberu  was  severely  beaten  
that day: tire fairy began  to pant seriously.  The story is not too 
interesting  when  I tell it; if you heard  it directly  from  my father's  
mouth  you would  have  been  greatly  amazed,  for (while  they  were  
fitting),  they  uprooted  the roots  of the trees  and  broke  stems  of trees  
witfl  their  feet, tiiey  uprooted  the shrubs,  and their  feet sounded  on 
the ground  like a drum.  They  were  all wet  as if they  were  beaten  by 
the rain.  But  after  a long  time  <rf continuous  fitting,  they  separated,  
sat down,,  and  rested.
"As they  were  resting,  the gate-keeper's  wife  brought  food  for her 
husband  and brought  water  along  with  it also. When  Olowo-aiye's  
wife,  who  had  remained  a bird  heretofore,  saw  this,  she changed  and 
became  a human  being,  got food  from  her pocket  and gave  It to her 
54






new  husband,  and  said.  Take  this,  eat  very  well,  try to avoid  stomach  
ache:  one husband  does  not surpass  the other.^^
"Thus  the two  of tiiem  took  care  of their  husbands,  because  taking  
care of her husband  is an important  job of the woman  who has a 
husband.  It is only  when  Imth  husband  and  wife  are happy  that they  
can  enjoy  flieir  children.^^  Patience  is both  the father  and  the mother  
of advantage;  it is onfya  foolish  person  that4xxmplains  that  he had  too 
much  patience,  for  fli^israoend  topatienoe.  Let  husbands  and  wives  
know  that  if the patience  they  have  for each  other  today  is more  than  
that of yesterday,  they will,be  wealthy  and will be blessed  with  
children  as well, and they will have peace,  which  tops the list, 
compared  with  both  money  and  children.  Let  people  continue  to cheat  
you  — be patient  — as you  know  within  yourself  that  that  is just the 
inception  of their  down-faU.  If a person  cheats  you,  and  you  pretend  
that  you  do  not  know you  have  put  that  person  into  a hot  pot  (with  
him  in it). But  if yon  arenotpahent  enough,  and  you  begin  tobe  angry  
with  the damn^-headed  person,  he will  drag  you  ijito  his stupidity;  
thm  he will  know  that  he had angered  you,  and he will then  put  on 
the garment  of pride  on his shoulders.  Since  he does not hope to 
progress  in life,  and  when  he hits  you  witii  sorrow,  he will  tiius  hinder  
you  from  progress  in the future.
"When  my father  and the fairy had rested  and had filled  
themselves  with  their  wives'  food  they  continued  their  fi^t.  (As the 
fight progressed),  smoke  started  ooming  out of the crown  of the 
gnome's  head  and this scared  the people  very  much.  But  before  they  
started  fighting  the second  time, fee beings'®^  in Igbo  Olcxlumare  
had  gathered  together  very  closely.  God  is a mighty  King;  my father  
experienced  all kinds  of troubles;  Olowo-aiye  is very  much  of a man  
indeed.  The : fi^t  continued  to be intensive,  because  the matter  was 
beginning  to take a shameful  shape  since both their wives  were  
standmg  by,  watching  their  husbands.  You,  my  scribe,  don'tyou  think  
that  one needs  to put more  effort  into'such  a fig^t?  He who  wants  to 
throw  a person  on tire ground  in the presence  of the person's  wife  
don't  you see that that person  is determined  to bring  shame  on tire 
person?  When  the  fighting  is finished,  the diame  will  still  remain;  then  
one  would  not  dare  to get into  any argument  with  one's  wife,  or else 
tire wife  would  rush  upon  the husband  (to hudi  him).  And  when  it 
comes  to the point  that file wife darts  upon  a husband  (to beat  him 
up),  and  vfiien  it oomfes  to the point  fiiat  the wife  slaps  the  husband  and 
kiciffi  file husband  and  tfte husband  beginsto  run  into  the room  and  file 
badyaid,  and  file  woriian  begins  to twist  file  husband's  shirt  around  his 
neck,  and  file wife  begins  to dhange  the  husband's  orders;  and  when  the 
wife  ^bea  out without  telling  die hudiand  and  when  we ask where  file 
wife is coming  fiom,  and she replies  by shunning  one throu^  facial  
expresabist,  dori't  you  see that  something  is indeed  wrong  there?
"Ahd  if a wife looks  at the husband  contemptuously,  all those
55






things  would  always  happen  between  husband  and wife.  Because  of 
this, on the day that Olowo-aiye  fought  the ’ gate-keeper,*'chaos  and 
unrest  filled-the  air in the forest.  Wliat  really  vitiated  eVpiy  thing  were  
tli« big drums  ^d tom-tom^^  which  die gnomes  of Igbo  Olodumare  
brought  to the place  of the fight  before  the sdoorid  round  of the fight  
start^.  The gnomes  were  beating  ^e druihs,  and  the'^idil^  and  the 
mc^eys  were beating  the bong6s,  and when ’ thejr ^sked  for my 
father's  name,  and he told them,  they'  hegari  to iht^ify^tii&r  praise  
drumming,  saying:^^ " ‘ . ..
”Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye,  collide  with him, ’aftafck  him, collide  
with  him, attack  him, the ^n of Akowediran,^^  the son of Akowe-  
diran,  Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye  can't  you perforrh  like your'father?  
Olowo-aiye,  Olo^o-aiye  are you healthy?  Are you healthy?  Is there  
any trouble?  Is there  any trouble?  Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye  there  is a 
big cudgel  on your  right  hand  side and a load  of whips  on your  left; 
the fall of the gnome  is on the peak  of the rock.^^  Olowo-aiye,  hold  
the arm of the fairy,  hold  the feet  of the gnome;^  lift the fairy  off the 
ground  completely . Olowo-aiye,  Olowo-aiye  the eyes  of die gnomes  
are on  you;  the eyes  of humans  are watching  you;  all the living  beings  
are gadiered,  filling  Igbo  Olodumare  complete,  etc., etc.®®
Thus the (talking)  drum  sounded  intensively  and both of them  
were  panting  as the ground  was shaking  terribly,  and all the forest  
came  to a complete  silen ’ce. After  a while,  Anjonnu-iberu  lifted  up my 
father's  right foot off die ground'  completely,  and’lie put it on his 
shoulder.  My father  also supported  himself  with  his left leg as die 
gnome  tried to push  him into die pit’so he would  fall into it — he 
would  have  filled  the pit to the brim  — but that  was impossible,  for 
before  he pushed  my father  intp the pit) my father  had extricated  his 
rightleg  out  of his grip,  and  had  Stood  firmly  on the ground;  and  when  
he took  a look  at the.gome's  eyes  he burst"into  laughter  and  said,  'A 
cat's  back  nevertouches  the ground:  if  s a taboo,'  and all the gnomes  
shouted.  It was  after  this that  my father  stooped  down  and  carried  the 
gate-keeper  on his shoulder  and was  moving  (toward  a rock)  hoping  
to dash  his back  against  a huge  rock  which  was close  by, but before  
he got to die rock,  that  fellow  had made  a monkey-like  tumble  from  
his shoulder  and  had  stood  on the ground,very  firmly,  and  the  gnomes  
beat their  dnuns  for joy, rejoicing  with die gate-keeper  for being  so 
lucky.  . -
After  a while,  this,gnome  was angry,  so he was  .determined  to 
show  hirnself  as a.gnome;  Ke^jtiang^.^d  became  a lion. Since  my 
father  was  not only  a young  hunter  lie behaved  like an adult  hunter:  
he took  the fruit  which  lus wife/s  older  sister  gave  Kim  (and)  put  it in 
his mouth.  Thus  he also,  changed  and became,  a lion. So lion  began  to 
fight  lion, and all the forest  was filled  with  bromirig  (voices  of these  
lions),  and  the grjomes  in Igbo  Olodumare  begaii  to run,around.  Later,  
the graime  chang^  Python  began  to fi^t






pythonXrtd^ll  the'.forest  beganfa^kputiike  anifrials
trouble  invadfed-Igbo-Olgduritarfez-TJlus  they began  tn cHange-irtto  ’ 
differ;pnt'kjnds*oifthings3itntilithey  changed-into  a fcobfa;  Bufb^re:  
?tejonnu4betu»changed ’fp(Jin0bat;iOlo\vi^^iyeihad  ch^ged  into asf 
ele'phant;aaridMdlfen ’-tilfe'6igphti4f  oali^lt  Mie cobfd  wilh4ts  trunk,^hfe  
brolsi^Mt^  haad  cdrti^teljo^usin^fatiifep  sawMhef  efid  of thisi
gate-'keipep;=ahd'the4igKt  beBame^/oved&i^l-allJ&rOund  thfe ‘vv6rl4"tfl»  
tha,tMrbegy^MlItoM^y}4heM4et^iiafVe^ripTsto^J>ed;^kifignl^ltfd«S<  
fi^t  atMte- ’^ates  (o&I^3t><)lddtlHt^y. ‘Be&oge  it was’thfere'that ’4h'e' 
fighters ‘becnniie  a’’cc^r^Wtds''a ‘pythoa;  whafe ’tfley alsfifibfe^athd  ^-• 
elephant?thS ’fatfi^of ’anSfhalsp  ' iv-"'. ’’ •' '">■ • - jb
-• "At Ibng  last, ifty- fathfef-tufited  back  into a-htitnafl  b^^^'but  
never  heaixl  ’about<Anjonnii-ibehu  'afiynioffe/>f6i? ’he vfhs completely  
dead.Kfy'fatheiCtddkMie'sn^ke  (fcobrainto  whicbMie  gate-keeper  h^ 
turned^  and threw,  it ih fiife^bumed-it;  and thre^  the asKes  ifl the’
ga‘rbage.JBtitwh ’fertSt?¥^'6tM^ ’f’'&Wdf<the^shes  was  wa^ettintdtfrie'  
little  river,*  itWas  thefeMiat'AeSS'aslfes  became*  a-poisonous  fish'4trttil*  
today.  Whenever  PSee-the  feK^Iiiyn&^fidyrwill'ShoW  it fo yob.  The'  
partof  the  asheMhatwas  nouwishedintd  theriver  On the day  becarhe  - 
a scorpion.  I shalbalso-teltow ’yoiQ'the  type ’Of-eddrpiOn  (that  it turned'  
into)  whereVterd  see'  it-.*But-theveryspdt  on  which  Aey  fon^lt  the fi^t ' 
neVer  ^ew  any  gra'Ss  ^yntOiM^insteadohthia,  the-inhabifantsof-lgbo'  
OlodumarteiJiiilt  a house  on if; in>whddT  thenew-^te-keeperthatm^  
chose  lived/  this gat6-keeper*was ‘n6tlike»th^  one'Of'did/  for he loved-  
both'men-and'enirfials^.helovedMiepeopleih  die ’-world'arid  thoselri-  
heaven.7  “.».b -' v: > o- l i
J "■^^ut  whaf  Wfis-the  erid  of  this  fight  for  my father??rhe  eiidofltwas-'  
very  good  indeediThe  house  which^ttieybdiltfor'the ’new'gate-keep^  
Was a stone-house,  afid there  Was  ari ihsciiption  "aboiil  my^fathef  Oh" 
the outside  of it. Here  are the things  they  wrote  on it: • ■ •' : ’ *
• /..“S'F4;^v.j'ij"!  . .1 ti '•>;', -* .S'lT”
.,'This.landisinmm^bran^pf  tihehorMaurableQlowpsaiye,  - ,, :
'. •. .‘Ra?
• . -l^}yjt;-i^dxu-ancSjW^§Ae  weapojy.;vfl^hi4^  'i;-
-^»nau.^,,AnjQn^l|-^jJ^,  who is .^egafekeeperof.Igbo  . 
„ l^boi^^spothave  ^durance
■-
- . : .J -
But  wim  endurance,  me Lord  is ready  to.assist  eyeiyojieJo  -< , 
' '‘Wtdfliat  ii?as the'wayMiey'WrOte ’the'hfecriplioiS  (drvtftewiffl)  of; 
the'TiOiise/  v>fith'iity^athgF^<^me  foi ifruritihtOd^^BuFft  'Ss'as-a'  sad; 
explii&ice  f<fi*him  in’ttiMFtheMeWga^keeper  didndtlasFfor ’Iong/^  
for as it is for human^bHrij^f^it  iS'foFthe'^biries  BeEause-thi^^  
gat^fe^ef  did hot'eiterave  Mi^feple  anddid  fii5i¥piiFtfi^*-iri-the






pawfl  category,  he saw them  as gentlemen/women,  and  bp began,  
to play with  them  —to the extent  that they  began  to disrespect  ttie 
edge  of his sword  —.because  as it is among  men so it is among  the 
gnomes..There-are  some  spiteful  ones  on earth,  who  never  make  use 
of die oppbrtutiity  their  God  the King  has given  to diem;  they  are the 
people  who  make  it very  difficult  for one to be  kind  to people.  If you 
respect  them  and  you  treat  them  like  human  beings,  instead  of loving  
you  with  alj their  hearts,  they  wouldhellave  spitefully  towards  you:  
these  people  are like  a tree  thatobstructs  traffic  on the  highway,  which  
dpes not allow  automobiles  to pass through  anymore,  for he who  
deals  with  them  once  would  not  want  to behave  well  to others  coming  
behindrhem  anymore.  Those  ones are like waste  materials  in die 
world;  may  God deliver  man  from  their  hands.  Please  my friends,  if 
anyone  gives  you respect,  you should  respect  die fellow  as well;  if he 
edifies  you,  tty to edify  him continuously  tco If a prominent  person  
treats  you  like  his neighbour,  try to uplift  him  the more  so that  he will 
realize  that you are not taking  him for granted  or treating  him 
spitefully.  Those  who do these things  are just stumbling  blocks  for 
others  coming  behind  them,  because  they  make  the strong  txies  tired  
of being  kind  to pwple;  and  the strong  people,  because  of this,  ill-treat  
those  who  are their  followers.  Why?  Because  they  would  say if they  
are good  to them,  tiieir  followers  would  merely  reward  them  with  a 
spiteful  treatment.  Those  who  behave  like this are guilty  before  the ' 
black  race,  and they  are guilty  before  the white  race;  they  are gnility  
before  those  who  are neidier  white  nor  black,  and  they  put  God  in the 
position  where  He would  say, 'If I had  known,  I would  have  created,  
these  people  as animals,  so that they  would  be grazing  in die forest  
around,  so that the hunters  would  chase  diem  with  guns  from  one 
generation  to the other.'  But God  would  never  say tiiis,  because  He is 
a merciful  God.
"They  began  to scandalize  die (new)  gate-keeper  around,  accusing  
him that he never  punished  or victimized  the people  going  dirough  
die gate as he should.  Because  of this, die gatekeeper  changed  his 
attitude  and  began  to behave  the way  diat  was  contrary  to the  natural  
way in which  God  had made  him.  At long  last; his attitude  Became  
worse  than that  of Anjonnu-iberu.  WhsQ  these  creatures  took  up a 
heavy  yoke  and carried  a load  which  is not  light  <wi their  head^  they  
conspired  against  the gate-keeper  until  the  f eUow  resigned  his  job  and 
came  to Igbo  Irunmole^* ’^ jjves  there  until  die  present  time
that  I am talking  (to you).  *
"But we are thankful  to God the (heavenly)  King in that Tghi 
Ininmole  was more comfortable  for him than Igbo Qlodumaie.  
Because  when  I personally  went  to Igbo  Irunmole  to hunt,  I^w  that 
he was not living  in a ground-floor  building  as he used hi Igbo,.  
Olodumare;  Lmet  him  in a diree-storey  building.
"Learn  from  ‘this, you, my friend;  if a person  is too strict; the
58






children  of the world  revile  him; if a person  is too soft-hearted,  the 
children  of, the world  would  abuse  him as well. But if a person  is 
in-between,  even  if one is reviled  by the fools  in the world,  one  would  
command  the respect  of the wise  ones,  and one  would  not be reeled  
by God  (the heavenly)  King.
“My scribe,  well done;  let me continue  with Olowo-aiye's  story  
because  that was die important  matter  that we were talking  about  
before  I digress^  intd the story  of die new  gate-keeper  who  replaced  
Anjonnu-iberu.  I left off the story  at the point  where  they  had a kind  
of inscription  about  my father  on the wall. Certainly,  you would  be 
surprised  that that was the only thing  that they did for my father.  It 
is true,  they  did more  than  that.^ ’’^
"When  my father  saw the end of the gnome,  all the inhabitants  of 
Igbo  Olodumare  decided  to take  him  to their  king.  Immediately,  they  
took  his hunting  garment  off my father's  neck.  And  they  put  one big 
flowing  garment  on his neck;  they gave  him (native)  trousers  made  
out of velvet,  and put a cap made  Out  of velvet  — with  a top pointed  
like a crown,  ornamented  with  gold  which  glittered  brightly  — on his 
head.  They  put shoes  made  of brass  on his feet.  A gold  ring was put 
on his finger . A chain  made  out  of gold  was  put  on his neck.  After  this, 
they  put  a staff  of beads  in his hand . They  also  took  his betrothed  wife,  
and they  adorned  her from  head  to the sole of her feet  — the body  of 
that  one (the  wife)  was  very  clean  and  was  as beautiful  as the rainbow  
on the sky. The woman's  teeth were shining  like a bright  
noon-sunshine.  This was the only  woman  that befitted  my father  in 
the glory  of this Igbo  Olodumare.  Yes, it is I who  told  you.  My father  
was a very  handsome  man;  only if anyone  wants  to scoff  (would  he 
then  deny  this fact);  I did not  just say that because  he was  my father,  
for even  the people  of our town  sang  about  him (his Kmdsomeness).  
They  used  to say of him: 'Olowo-aiye  is really  a handsome  man.'
'After  they  had thus  adorned  botii  of them,  they  put  them  in a cart, 
and  they  were  rolling  them  along.  It was  a great  day  in this  great  forest:  
the animals  and the birds were shouting  'your  highness,'  in loud  
voices.  All the trees began  to bow, and the lianas  began  to salute  
Olowo-aiye,  as he and  his wife  were  proudly  going  along  in the forest  
in their  royal  greatness.
'When  they reached  the king of Igbo Olodumare's  palace,  the 
matter  defied  response.Because  the place  was very  beautiful,  its 
beauty  was  more  than  what  a mouth  can describe.^* ’-'’ When  they  got 
to the outside  (in the front)  of the palace,  tiie king  himself  was inside  
house.  And  when  he appeared  before  my  father,  my  father  was  afraid.  
He immediately  fell to the ground  and sprinkled  some  earth  on his 
head,^®^  and he shouted,  'Your  Highness,'  and respected  him, as a 
king.
'After  this, the king  answered  and said: “Was it you who killed  
Anjonnu-iberu?
59






He answered  and said,  'Your  highness,  it is I.'
And  the king  asked  him again  and said,  'What  means  did you use 
to kill  Anjonnu-iberul°7  And  what  did  you,depend  upon  to have  done  
that?'
My father  also replied  and said "May  God endow  you with  long  
life, die means  that I used  was  just a short  one: I determined  to fight  
the gnome,  I started  fighting,  I endured  die hardship  of the fight,  and 
I depended  on God  die (heavenly)  King  who  made  me.  Your  highness,  
I want  you to know  with  certainty  from  today,  drat  he who  wants  to 
achieve  a good  thing  and determines  (to do) a good  dung,  and  begins  
a good  dung,  and endure^  the hardship  that  is involvedin  that  good  
thing,  and  depends  on God  the (heavenly)  King,  that  one  would  never  
be in the midst.of  the backward  one ever.'
This  king  answered  again  and said,  'Who  is your  fathei??'
My father  also answered  and said, 'Your  highness,  it is 
Akowediran.'
The king  asked  again  and said,  'Are  you married?'
My father  also  answereid  and  said,  'I have  a fiance,  and  it is shie  who  
is sitting  by me here in the cart.'
After  that, this king shouted  in a very  loud  voice  and said, 'You  
powerful  man, you child of man,!^^  it jg in this place  that I shall  
conduct  your  marriage;  there  is wisdom  in your  head,  I shall  many  a 
wife  for you,  when  it is about  two  or three  monfiis  from  today.  I shall  
send for all of my friends  throughout  the forest;  I shall  also send a 
message  to the dome  of heaven  for the people  there  to come  and be 
merry  because  of your  matter.  All of you my children,  I want  you to 
bear in mind  that there is not anything  that is on this earth that is 
impossible  for anyone  to do: he who  wants  to be wealthy  can  beocJme  
wealthy;  he who wants  to become  an important  person  can become  
an important  person;  but a lazy  person  who does  not want  to suffer  
(for anytiung)  and wants  to be an important  person.would  forever  
remain  in the mids.t  of the retrogressive  people.  A child who  
indentures  himself  to learn  a trade  today,  who  works  hard  to know  
that trade  and  trusts  in God  who  created  him,  let that  one fear  not, let 
that  one continue  to persevere,  even  if he is not able to find a cup of 
to drink  and does  not take more  than  a spoon  of and 
when  his master  excretes,  he is to be responsible  for its disposal,  and 
if foe master  wears  a garment  made  of velvet  fabric  he wears  a tattered  
shirt,  let him  know  that  he himself  would  be promoted  in foe nearest  
future.  All those  things-  that he had been  doing  for his master  as a 
learner,  others  are coming  who  would  do foe same  things  for him  as 
well.  I tell you foe truth,  for it does  not behove  foe child  of man  to lie; 
neither  does  it behove  the child  of a gnome.
Take  Olowo-aiye  who  delivered  Igbo  Olodumare  from  foe hands  
of Anjonnu-iberu,  give him a bath,  put trousers  on him,  adorn  him 
with  more  ornaments  foan  these  (foe ones  he has on now).  Takefoim  






and his wife  upstairs  in my palace  over  there;  let him live there,  and 
after some time, I will come to conduct  a marriage^^^  for Akow^  
diran's  child.
“So they  did; they  began  to take care  of my father  and  left his wife 
with  him,  living  together  for three  months  before  they  conducted  their  
wedding  for them.
“Within  these  three  months,  my father  ate food  and  was plump,  
and the back  of his neck  was very  fat indeed.  Even  before  my father  
left  the world,  there-was  not  a day  when  he told  the story,  that  I would  
not burst  into laughter.  He used  to say thus: 'I ate and my stomach  
got  terribly  protruded  like  that  of a baby  bird:  a big  stomach  that  drove  
the navel  all the way inside.  My hip became  big and bulky.  My wife  
could  not go throu^  a narrow  doorway  anymore,  because  her legs 
were fatter  than the cement  pillars  of a budding;  and her hip was 
^heavy  enough  to be a full load  for six muscular  men.  And  the back  o) 
her  peck  was  as big as the size  of eight  people  put  together.  She  hersell  
had  changed  the way  she  walked:  she lifted  her legs  at intervals  as she 
walked  along,  like those  of a grazing  cow,  and she  never  behaved  like 
a small person  anymore:  she was behaving  like the wife of an 
important  person  (in the society) . Noble  men  do not  want  to walk  like 
the common  nien;  wealthy  people  do not want  to walk  like the poor  
people,  and women  love to hluff  very much.  My wife's  older  sister  
changed  too, for her face  was  smooth  like the young  leaves  on a lime 
tree, and her entire  body was clean and ligHt like the body of . a 
three-day  old baby,  for all of us ate tasty  and nutritious  food;  We ate 
delicious  soup;  we ate the arms  of animals;  we ate the  livers  of animals;  
we ate (chicken)  gizzards,  and we also ate their  adam's  apples  too."
"This  was the way  my father  used  to tell the story,  all of us would  
laugh;  all of us would  somersault;  all of us would  roll around  on the 
floor.
“On my father's  wedding  day,  there  was  a big merriment  forough-  
out Igbo  Olodumare.  There  were  all kinds  of food  in the  king's  palace;  
there  were  poundted  yam  with  okra soup  and meat,  rice and melon  
oil prwared  with  onion  and  pepper,  and a jumbo with
1 soup  filled  with  meat.  Beans  with  small  fish  and  shrimp  caught  
in die ocean,  which  they  had  roasted  and  had  dried  stiff,  were  cooked  
together  and were  placed  around.  Fried  yams  were  nothing,  and no 
one cared  for fried plantain  on this wedding  day. And we cannot  
count  all the contemporary  foods  like butter  and  bread  and all kinds  
of European  cake  up to biscuits  of today  which  wise  women  make  out 
of coconut  and European  salt. Big drums  and savi .seker^^^  
and tom-tom,  violin  and bok^^'^  and all other  kinds  of drums  made  
by both  black  and white  people,  all these  things  were  brought  to this 
party:  it was a great  day (indeed).
''But  I am sorry  to tell you that the party  ended  with  a fight  that 
day, because  the animals  were  separated,  and a table  was prepared
61






for them. The lion was the chaifman,  and the elephant  was the 
assistant  chairman,  and  the other  little  animals  were  waiters.  This  was 
where  the fight  began;  whenever  the lion asked  for something  to be 
given  to him, and me head  of the waiters,  the antelope,  tried  to give 
him  what  he asked  for, he would  Scratch  him  with  his nails;  he would  
pull  him  toward  himself  as if  lie wished  to eat him,  but  he would  say, 
T'm just kidding.  After  a while,  the antelope  could  not bear it any 
longer,  so he reported  him to the bridegroom,  and the bridegroom  
rebuked  the chairman.  So it was  with  the birds;  the ostrich,  the father  
of birds,  who  was invited  from  Igbo  Irunmole  to come  ana chair  (the 
birds)  could  not come  because  of some  domestic  hindrance.  -The  eagle  
thus  became  the chairman  in his place . The  pets  could  not  attend  either  
so they sent  six hens  as their  representatives.  Whenever  the eagle  left 
his seat,  he would  come  to these  six hens  under  the pretense  that  he 
was simply  playing  with them.  So was it with the fox; he began  to 
behave  as a hypocrite  too;  he asked  the lion  who  was the chairman  to 
excuse,  him, only to come  to the place  where  the birds  were  sitting,  
and  he stared  at the chickens  — it was  very  bad behavior  indeed.
"But  at long  last,  the animals  and  the  birds  became  drunk,  and  they  
began  to act foolishly;  the elephant  began  to push  the trees  down,  the 
lion began  to kill ottier  animals,  the fox killed  one of the hens,  and 
eagle started  chasing  the birds around.  At last, the bridegroom  
became  angry  and drove  all of them  away.
"When  the gnomes  were  coming  to tips party,  men were  highly  
terrified:  why?  It was  because  of these  gnomes'  apparent  wealth;  some  
wore  gowns  mad^  of beads;  some  had clowns  made  with money  
(coins);  some  would  eat with  diamond  spoon.  Others'  gowns  looked  
like silver.  None  of them  had a leather  shoe  on. If one did not have  a 
pair  of shoes  made  of gold  on, that one would  have  on one made  of 
silver;  another  would  put  on one  made  of beads;  except  those  who  did 
not have feet — those  did not have any shoes  — they were  simply  
hopping  around  like frogs.  Many  were  those  who were exactly  like 
human  beings,  and  the king  of Igbo  Olodumare  was  not  different  from  
you and I. Still, some  of them  did not compare  with  humans;  they  
were  bluffing  in their own way. So one-legged  Osanyii/^^  did not 
forget  his only  leg because  he had  a diamond  shoe  on it. The  gnomes  
did  not  want  to eat out of anybody's  plate:  everyone  broughthis  own  
plate from home,  with spoons  and cups. Before  they left in the 
evening,  they gave those  precious  Bungs  to my father  as gifts.  The 
event  was colourful  at Igbo Olodumare  because  the gnomes  were  
drunk,  and they  wtere  dancing  to the best  of their  abilities.
"After  he had gone to his house,  my father  gathered  together"  all 
those  precious  gifts they  had given  him (they  became  his treasure),  
and they  made  him  a wealthy  man  for a long,  long  time.  If it were  not 
because  of thieves  (who  stole  most  of those  Bungs),  the wealth  would  
have  been  in abundance  to the extent  that those  of us (who  are his 






children)  would  not  have  needed  to work  for our  daily  bread.  Because  
I want  you to remember  (hat  my father  had  been  to school  before  he 
started  hunting,  and the wisdom  that  he had  acquired  in school  was 
helping  him to accumulate  money.  An educated  family  is never  
stricken  with  poverty:  if they do not have  money  today,  tomorrow  
they  will have  (money),  j^er  this event,  when  my father  got lost in 
Igbo  Olodumare,  until  the time  when  he killed  Ojola-ibinu^® —who  
is the head  of all the snakes  in the world  — my father  also found  one 
brought  back,  which  brought  money  to him . You  will 
hear  about  this story  subsequently.  
“Thus,  the  king  of Igbo  Olodumare  spent  so (lavishly)  for my  father  
on this (his)  wedding  day,  that  there  had  been  nothing  like it since  the 
king  had ascended  the throne.
“On the next  morning,  my father  woke  up very  early  and thanked  
him (toe king).  When  he saw toe king,  he prostrated  flatly,  and said,  
'Your  Highness,  may  God  prolong  your  life, may  the Lord  allow  you 
to live  long  on earth.  Death  will  never  sever  your  life, and  disease  will 
never  tie you  up;  you  will  live to be old,  you  will  live to be straight,^^!  
and  you  will  be our father  for a long  time.  I want  you to know  that  all 
those  tilings  that  you  have  done,  you  have  not done  them  for me:  you 
have  done  them  for God  toe (heavenly)  King.^22  j gm certain  that as 
it is true that  toe wicked  stiall  reap  wickedness,  so it is also true that 
toe good  people  shall  reap  goodness.  I know  what  you  have  done  for 
me, and your  reward  is in toe hands  of the  Creator  of all tilings;  your  
benefit  will come  from  toe dome  of heaven.  The sky is filled  with  toe 
showers  of blessings,  and they will be shower^  on you. Your  
Highness,  be mindful  of toose  destructive  pests  that  eat up toe crops:  
as toey  spoil  yam,^23  gg they  spoil  banana,  arid  they  do not  allow  com  
to cob with  grains;  God  is only  speaking  to us in parables,  for so are 
the thankless  people.  They  are like vicious  pests;  toey  always  eat up 
their  neighbour's  roots,  so tiiat that  one would  not grow  up, so that 
one would  stand  still like stagnant  water.  He to whom  kindness  is 
done  and  make's  nothing  of it, is like toe one whose  life is saved  from  
an accident  and sees  one's  (his rescuer's  first  son)  first-bom  male  and 
shoots  him  (dead);  toe judgement  of such  a person  is not  in toe  hands  
of man:  it is in the hands  of God  (the  heavenly)  King.  Your  highness,  
I know  toe good  things  you  have  done  for me. May  God  enable  me to 
show  you torough  my actions  that  I have  placed  you  in an important  
spot  in my heart.
“Thus  my father  had spoken;  he thanked  his benefactor,  and  that 
one (toe Idn^  was  happy  that  he did not show  kindness  to an ingrate  
and did not put a gown  around  a pig's  neck;  he did not put
pants  orfa  baboon;  ndtiier  did he wnq>  cupped  underwear  around  the 
waist  of a woman,  and  he did  not  promote  a hypocrite  as toe chairman  
of a union;  nettoer  did  he make  a treacherous  person  toe  moderator  of a 
meeting,  anc^  he did  not  take  care  of an underserving  person.l^S
63






"The  king  answered  and said,  Olowo-aiye,  thank  you very  much.  
I am grateful  to you.  These  are the types  of things  that  we expect  the 
children  of die world  to do (always),  among  the bl^ck,  among  the 
whites,  among  those  that  are neither  black  nor white,  that  die young  
should  give  to the adult,  his due  place,^26 d the adult  likewise  to the 
young;  that  the servant  should  give the master  his due place  and  die 
master  likewise  to the servant;  that  the husband  should  give  the wife  
her  due  place,  and  the  wife  should  also  give  the  husband  his  due  place.  
This  is die purpose  of my speech:  you, Olowo-aiye,  you got up very  
early  in the morning  in this cold  weather,  you  came  to my  house,  you 
sat down,  and  you  began  to honour  me; you did not see me as slave,  
nor looked  at me as a bond  man;  you did not say; 'What  will this 
ragged  old man  do? Instead,  you  began  to say good  dungs  about  me: 
thank  you very  much  as a person  who  is appreciative  of good  things  
done  to you.  This  is not true  of another  person  to whom  much  more  
had  been  done,  and  on die next  day,  he began  to look  at one right  on 
the tip of one's  nose.  And  when  one asked:  'Can't  you  even  greet  us?' 
he answered  and  said,  'Doi  owe  you  anything?'  Therefore,  I want  you 
to know  that  which  I did for you yesterday  was small  (compared  to 
that  which  is coming  in the future),  may  God  spare  our lives;  may  He 
grant  that  we know  ea^h  other  for a long  time;  for when  there  is life, 
everydiing  else is trivial;  life surpasses  everydiing  else.  But I want  to 
tell you  somediing —there  is so much  sorrow  among  the sons  of men,  
so much  that we gnomes  do not want  to live among  them.  If it were  
not because  the children  of the world  (try to) endure  sorrow,  they  
would  be taking  their  own  lives  every  day. God  loves  mankind,  but 
man alienates  himself  from  God the (heavenly)  King,  and a sinner  
does  not go unpunished;  the sins of the diildr^  of the world  do not 
allow  diem  to enjoy  the world.  If you are interested  in hunting,  take 
your  gun  and go hunting;  you can always  come  back  to the palace  to 
pass  the night.  I Would  like you to think  over-this  matter;  for it does  
not behove  the young  to reject  the suggestions  of the adult^^?  except  
if the suggestion  is misleading.  Once more,  I thank  you for your  
coming;  greet  your  wife  for me, and greet  her older  sister  as well.
"This  was  the way  the king  spoke  to my father,  and,  as it behoved  
him,  my father  also tiianked  him;  he also  promised  that  he would  go 
home  .and put the matter  before  his wife, and after they had 
deliberated  on it, he would  bring  an answer  to the king.  After  this they  
greeted  each  other,  the king  entered  into  the room,  and  my father  also 
got out (of the house).
"When  my father  got home,  he told his wife,  and when  both of 
them  thou^t  about  it, they agreed  to stay  with  the king  for a long  
time  and,  if possible,  they  would  make  the  place  their  permanent  place  
of abcxle.  This was the way tiie first  important  part of my fatiier's  
biography  ended.
' 'The  second  part  is very  interesting  also,  but,  my  friend,  let  us leave  
64






that one until tomorrow  morning.  The second  part would  not be 
difficult  for  you  to write  for my father  had  written  that  down  with  his 
own  hand  before  his death.  The  note  that  he wrote  on is not with  me 
how;  it is at home,  and  when  I bring  it with  me tomorrow,  I shall  put 
myself  in my father's  place;  I shall  read  it to you,  and you will write  
down  whatever  I say, so it would  seem  as if it were  my father  who  
had come  to your  house  telling  you the story  of his own life. Good  
bye;  expect  me very,  early  tomorrow  morning.
This  was  the way  he spoke  that  day,  and  since  he was  a gentleman,  
he never  failed  in his promise.  Because  of this, immediately  when  it 
was  dawn  the following  day,  I began  to prepare.  I had  put  my  writing  
materials  down  before  he came.
65






Elephant-killing  Hunter  Went  Astray  in 
the Forest  of God:  It was a Tug-of-War
When  he entered  my house  on the second  day,  he showed  me the book  
which  his father  wrote  with  his own  hand.  In this  book,  his father  told 
the story of his own life, from the time he was die king of Igbo  
Olqdumare,  until  the time’he came  back  home.
After  Akara-ogun  had shown  this to me, he sat dowrron  the chair  
totally  relaxed,  and told me to pretend  that  he was Olowo-aiye.  So, he 
put himself  in his father's  position  and was reading  the book  to me. 
And I also took my pen; I sat as someone  writing  ought"to  sit, and I 
continued  to work.  The words  which  Olowo-aiye  wrote  in the book  
would  constitute  the second  part of this book-.  Ihese  are his words:
"I, Olowo-aiye,  the son of Akowediran,  a handsome  man,  I came  
to Igbo  Olodumare  to hunt;  I met with  difficulty  on the way,  but God  
delivered  me from them all. At last I reached  the king of Igbo  
Olodumare;  it was the king  who paid  for the wedding  ceremony,  foe 
wedding  ceremony  of my wife, who bore my son Akara-ogun.  Tlje-'  
king  spent  very  much  for my wedding.  He spentrfTOney  as well  as his 
energy;  he took care of me as it behoves  one who loves  a person  (to 
care for the one whom  he loves).  Therefore,  I think  foat I sljould  start  
to write  my autobiography  down,  because  my eyes  have  seen  some ­
thing  in the past.  This king's  behaviour  has shown  me (the fact)  foat 
whatever  one's  eyes  have  seen  in foe world  ought  to be written  down  
for those  who are coming  after  (to read),  because  foe world  is filled  
with pits, plain fields,  and hills. I, who had fought  Anjonnu-  iberu  
who was the gate-keeper  of Igbo Olodumare,  I who Seemed  as if I 
were  then  about  to end my li(e in the world,  1 also  found  myself  in foe 
cart;  after  that, with my behfofoed  vyife,  1 again  became  one who  was 
living  in a multi-storey  building;  I'^'am^one  who  got married,  and 
the news  of whose  marriage  splread  throughout  foe world;  even  foe 
inhabitants  of heaven  knew  about  it. 1 have to write the rest of my 
autobiography,  because  I do not know  what  is coming  ahead.
"It was God who gave the king of Igbo Olodurame  wisdom:  he 
66






would  not dare behave  like an unwise  fellow,  who would  seek the 
downfall  of a stranger,  because  he knew  that a city which  hates  
strangers  hurts  itself,  for it would  be easier  for a three-year  old child  
fo be the chairman,  of a city committee,  than  for a city which  hates  
strangers  to have  any  progress.  I cannot  forget  the palace  forever;  the 
king  of Igbo  Olodumare  really  took  care  of me.
"When  it had been  six months  since  I began  living  in this king's  
palace,  my  wife's  pregnancy  wasifiree  months.  When  my wife  being  
with my first child's  (Akara-og^'s)  pregnancy,  I prepared  in the 
morning  of one day; I left for me forest  to hunt.  By ttiis time I had 
become  an elephant-killing  hunter.
"hfy  wife  accompanied  me  to file  road  (to the forest),  and  when  die 
was about  to turn back, she told me to try. to come  back on time,  
because  she would  be lonely . After  this,  die prayed  for my  success  in 
finding  enough  game.  She  also  requested  fiiat  Ibring  a parttdge  home  
for her, (if I could  find,  one), because  she want^  so much  to eat 
partridge;  so it is with  women  when  they  are pregnant;  they  do not 
have  appetite  for just any food;  they  are always  picky,  and he who  
does  not take care of a pregnant  woman,  is not a human'being  —he 
should  be called  a viper  in human  skin—a viper  is' a poisonous  snake,  
but an earthworm  gently  plays  around  (without  hurting  any one}.  
Therefore,  I was taking  care of my wife at fiiis time;  I was really  
indulging  her very much,  and when  die talked  about  partridge,  I 
determined  to look  for  it at all cost.  Moreover,  when  pepper  and  onion  
fall upon  a partridge,  things  are bound  to be all right.™  After  this, 
my  'wdfe  went  a little  bit farfiier  witii  me, and  I greeted  her,  saying:  'Go 
back  my  b^utiful  wife;^29  watdf  (our)  home  until  my  arrival;  I shall  not 
stay  long:.prepare  rice  for me before  I come,  because  it was  a jumbo  eko 
that  I ate yesterday,  and  I ate one the day  before  yesterday  top. I shall  tty 
to bring  some  game;  and  if my  hand  gets  hold  of a partridge,  then  things  
would  certainly  be good;  should  anyone  look  for me, tell the fellow  that 
I have  quickly  left for the outside  of the dty-Wall.
'T had  not  gone  very  far,  when  I came  to a part  of Igbo  Olodumare,  
and I was very  surprised  because  there  trees  had no roots,  and they 
stood  straight,  yet they  had  very  green  leaves;  the animals  there  spoke  
like humans,  and so did the birds.
"When  I entered  into  this  forest,  I did  not see anything  at all, I never  
saw animals,  neither  did I see a bird: squirrels  did not even  pass  on 
the tree before  me. I walked  for a long  time.  But I did not see a thing.
"After  a while,  a (strong)  wind  began  to blow;  all those  rootless  
trees began  to do obeisance,  and they were standing  back up. The 
wind  was great  indeed  — blowing  here and there,  all the trees  and 
lianas  were  bumping  into one anofiier.
"The  situation  was very,  very difficult;  were  it not because  of my 
Creator's  mercies,  the trees  would  have  hit and killed  me — God is 
indeed  a great  King.
67






"After  a while,  when  one of those  tall trees did obeisance  by my 
side, I quickly  sat on it before  it stoop  up, and when  the wind,  blew  
again,  I went  up with  the tree.  And  lhe tree was  very  tall;  if a person  
looked  at me from the ground,  I would  have looked  very tiny (up 
there).  First,  I was  happy  when  I reached  up there,  because  I saw the 
whole  panorama  of the area very  clearly;  all the shrubs  were  deeply  
green,  and the landscape  was very beautiful.  But after a while,  I 
realized  that insteackof  rejoicing  (for being  up there),  I should  be 
crying-  Because  after  I got up there,  the wind  ceased  to blow.  Liana  
stood  the way  it was  before;  the trees  ceased  to do obeisance.  If I had 
known,  I should  have quickly  jumped  down  when  the wind  was 
blowing,  but now that the tree was standing  up, my coming  down  
would  not  be without  some  difficulty,  for I could  not  jump  from  such  
a high  place;  if I did,  my arms  and  legs  would  have  broken  into'pieces.  
The tree was so tall, and its trunk  was so sleek,  that  no one could  get 
down  from  its top by himself  at all. This  depressed  me, and I began  
to regret  what  had  prompted  me to behave  so stupidly.
"As  I was  thinking  about  these  things,  I saw  an antelope  which  was 
passing  by, and ! called  on him,^^  I said 'Antelope!  Please  take me 
out of this bondage.  It was a tree that fell that  I sat upon,  and when  
die wind  began  to blow  the tree that fell down  stood  up, and that  is 
the reason  why you see me siting  down  on the top of the tree. May  
God  forbid  your  being  imprisoned  at such  a peak  of an afternoon  as 
this.  The owner  of this day  will  not allow  you to starve  for speech.  
My dear  antelope,  you are (very)  important  among  animals,  because  
you  have  both  white  and  brown  colours,  and  your  feet  are strong,  and 
you  have  pointedhoms  on your  head.  A farmer  who  does  not  respect  
you  would  never  find  yams  to eat; a farm  owner  who  thinks  you  are 
worth  nothing  would  continue  to labour  for nothing.  Therefore,  I 
adjure  you,  for God the (heavenly)  King's  sake,  do not refuse;  try to 
take me out of my predicament,  so that I may get out of this place  
where  I am locked  on top of this tree.  If you take  me down,  I will  not 
forget  you  forever,  and  I will take  you  to someone's  farm  where  there  
is a lot of okra;  you'll  eat and  your  belly  will stick  out.
"After  I had  said  so, the antelope  answered  me,  but  his answer  was 
contrary  to my expectation.  He said, 'You are the one on the tree; I 
really  sympatiiize  with  you very  much,  but there  is nothing  I can do 
for you.  Those  of us who  are antdopes  do not  climb  trees,  because  we 
are different  from  snakes  and squirrels,  and we are not in the same  
category  with  the apes  and  the  brown  monkeys.  Even  if I were  able  to 
climb  up, I would  have  even  gone  on my way,  at least  for this time,  
before  I would  come  back  to help  you.  Aa you see me today,  I am on 
an errand  for ftie animals,  because  today  is their  meeting-day.  Little  
dungs  matter:  he who  is given  a small  tiling  and does  not thank  one 
(the giver),  is an ingrate;  he who does not say is ignorant;  
therefore,  I want  to go, because  I'm in a hurry.  Even  though  your  
68






words  are like bribery,  because  you promised  to show  me an okra  
farm,  still I will  not  be able  to give  you any  advice.  There  is no bribery  
in Igbo  TOJodumare,  because  die path  of bribery  is a crooked  one,  but 
the path  of truth  is wide  and  very  clean —goodbye.
"It- was  not  long  after  the antelope  left that  I saw  a hare  passing  by; 
I tried  again;  I called  on Kim  and  I said,-'Hare!'  He answered  me, arid 
he said,  wVho  are you  calling  me from  the tope  of the tree?'
And  I answered  him  and  I said,  'It is I, die son  of a man,  calling  you 
from ’the -top of the three;  I want  you  to help  me so that I may  quickly  
get down  from  this’top-most  height  of the tree. It was the wind  that 
blew  which  tnade'-the  tree fall on the ground,  and I sat on it; and  all of 
a sudden  when  the wind  ceased  blowing,  the tree stood  up while  I 
was  still on it, and  I went  up with  the tree,  and  coming  back  down  has 
becorne  a problem  for me. ’But as soon  as I saw  you,  I felt relieved  for 
who  is that  animal  in the forest  that  would  say tiiat  he does  not know  
you, Mr. Hare?  You are not like some  others  whose  inner  eyes  have  
gone  blind;  for if one's  inner  eyes  have  been  blinded,  one would  ncrf 
see one's  own  vicious  behaviour.  If you have seen someone  who is 
shameless,  I want  you to know  that die inner  eyes  of that fellow  are 
blinded.  But  you,  Mr. Hare,  your  inner  eyes  are clearly  open.  You  are 
a powerful  one  among  the  animals;  you  can  run  much  faster  dian  most  
of them.  And  your  ears are not small,  compared  to how  big you are. 
Therefore,  please  be not  unhelpful  to me in this  matter;  and  advise  me 
on the way  I can get down  from  die top of the tree where  I am."
'This was the way I spoke  sweetiy,  but still die hare's  reply  was 
different  from  my expectation.'
He answered  and said; 'A matter  that is as soft as a ripe banana  
does  not demand  an answer  that  is as hard  as die sleek  pebbles  in the 
stream.  I like  your  speech,  and  if I were  not sent  on an errand,  I would  
have  stayed  with  you here,  and I would  have  tried  my best  possible;  
I would  have  seen  to it that  you got down  from  where  you  are on die 
top of the tree. But do not let diis matter  make  you sad, for there  ard 
odiers  coming  behind  me, and  if you  do not  lessen  your  effort  in telling  
the passers  by, things  would  soon be all right. But I seriously  
admonish  you,  do not  be like the people  without  understanding,  who  
are wise in their own Sight,  who would  not tell people  about  flieir  
problems;  those  people  cover  up nettie^^  around  themselves  witii  
cloth:  thus  terrible  matters  would  cling  to them  closely,^^^  and if they  
(keep  their  problems  inside)  and laugh  outwardly  in the sight  of the 
children  of the world,  sadness  would  then  sit relaxed  on a chair  in the 
comer  of their  hearts  .^^5
"Please  let. me go on my way, because  today  is die committee  
meeting  of the animals.  Those  who sent me on an errand  are elderly  
people  — and he who wants  to grow  old, should  not take elders'  
matters  frivolously —sorry,  (Mr.)  Elephant-hunter,  I sympathize  with  
you in your  travail,  goodbye  for now;  may your  head“® bring  you
69






down,  where  your  stupidity  has taken  you up tfiere."
'When  the hare finished  his speech,  he took to his heels  and ran 
witti  all his might:  I was  left  alone  on file tree.  My lips were  dried,  the 
saliva  in my  mouth  became  sticlw,  and  my stomach  was  flat;  my eyes  
saw a lot of trouble.  I sat roundly  on the tree; I looked  like a brown  
monkey  and was comparable  to the baboon;  I remembered  home;  I 
remembered  friends;  I missed  my wife; I suffered  in six hundred  
ways;  I was disgraced  in eight  hundred  ways.  I made  a great  hiss;  I 
cri^  the cry of art adult;  I put  on a frowned  face;  I looked  up; I looked  
down;  I thought  for a long time,  but I couldn't  find anyming  with  
which  to do anything.^37  \
'It wasn't  too long  after  this,  when  a rat was  passing  by; I had  to try 
very  hard  to be able to recognize  that it was a rat (that  was passing  
by) because  in the place  where  I was, so far from  the ground,  every ­
thing  looked  very  tiny.  I called  on him,  and I said,  "feat!"
He too answered,  and  said,  'Who  is calling  me rat I, a pilgrim  in the 
forest,  I, a pilgrim  in tire jungle,  I, who  go< around  in life through  the 
midst  of liana  and trees?"
I too replied,  and I said,  "It is I, Olowo-aiye,  that  am calling  you.  I, 
the son of Akowediran.  I, an elephant-hunter,  the husb^d  of 
Ajediran,  who  has come  to hunt  in the forest,  and wait  delicately  
on this tree. Please  help me, rat, you who are strolling  around;  there  
is no one  who  is small  in the sight  of God  the (heavenly)  King,  except  
a hypocritical  person,  who  invites  a thief  to come  and steal  and goes  
to tell tire owner  of tire  farm  to watch  his farm  (closely),  and  the  owner  
of the farm  tiranks  him, and so does the thief  — thus the judgntent  
against  a hypocrite  is in the vault  of heaven.  You rat of Ig^ Olodu-  
mare,  you are small  in the sight  of men  (though  you are bigger  than  
a pouch  rat found  in some  places),  but I want  you to know  one thing:  
you  are not  small  in the sight  of God  the King.  You  are not a hypocrite  
who  keeps  blood  inside,  and spits  white  saliva  out;^^^  who  praises  a 
person  in his presence,  and  slanders  him  behind  his back.  My  dear  rat, 
let me tell you  a little  story:  one day  ahypocrite  and  I were  in a union;  
when  he observed  that  one man  was going  to spoil  tire union,  all of 
us unanimously  agreed  that  he should  leave  the union.  Immediately  
after  we dismissed  tire meeting,  he secretly  sneaked  to the man  and 
told  him  that  he was  not part  of the plan  against  tire man.  At lorrg  last, 
all the members  of tire union  heard  about  it, and  tire hypocrite  felt very  
ashamed.  When  we asked (him) about  the matter,  the hypocrite  
answered  like a stammerer.  We all felt like dropping  his head  off. My 
dear  rat, you  are irot  like  tiris,  and  I am  begging  you  todemonstrateyour  
ri^teousness  to me add deal  witir  me in your  truthfulness  and tell me 
plainly  tire  way  lean  get  myself  down  from  tiris  confinement,  vdrere  (my)  
stupidity  has  taken  me,  oirtire  very  top here.
"Thus  did I speak  to this rati and  he also__gave  me an appropriate  
answer,  aird  he said: 'You  hunter  who  are on tire top of the tree, I am 
70






grateful  to you  for  your  good  words  about  me.  Be courageous,  and  be 
more  patient.  Those  who  are heads  had to be patient  before  they  got 
to the positicm  of being  tire leaders.  Those  who  are leaders  had to be 
patient  in order  to prevent  themselves  from  leading  the people  under  
them  astray.  It was  patience  that  God  had  which  prevented  Him  from  
destroying  the children  of ttie world  completely . Today  is the day of 
the assembly  of the animals,  where  all kinds  of animals  gather  
together  and deliberate  on their  lives.  It was because  I was htmgry  
that  I had  to ^eak  out  of their  midst,  for if hunger  is eliminated  him  
poverty,  there  is not much  poverty  left to talk about;  but take  note  of 
the words  that I will speak  to you now,  so that  you will get off soon,  
for so many  people  who  have  acted  the same  way  as you have  acted  
now, ’*'’ have  died  on the tree.  When  titp  meeting  is over,  you  will  hear  
the bell; after  the bell, you will feel a strong  wind;  the wind  will be 
stronger  than tire one that first blew  (before  you sat on the tree).  At 
this time,  you should  find your  way  out. But the wind  will be very  
strong.  Indeed,  for as the trees  make  their  worship,  they  will get up 
again.  Please  be careful  so that a tree  does  not  hit you on your  head,  
so that it will not be blcavn  out and you consequently  become  a 
pilgrim  to heaven.  My speech  to you is not more  than  this.  I am now  
going  to look  for food;  after  I have  eaten  food,  I shall  come  back  to see 
you;  goodbye.  Your  preseverance  in this  chaos  is commendable;  may 
your  Creator  bring  you  down  from  where  you  are  precariously  sitting  
on the tree.
'This was the way the rat spoke  to me, and I thanked  him very  
much,  and I said, "I am grateful  to you (Mr.)  Rat, may  God  protect  
your  privacy,** ’ may  God’*^ spare  our children;  I understood  your  
language  very  clearly;  I heard  you,  and  I will  be expecting  to hear  die. 
bell,  and I will be prepared  for the wind,  and  I will  not  let a tree come  
near  my heard.  You  should  also  be careful;  go gently;  it is die child  of 
the land owner  that steps  on die land with care, but the son. of a 
stranger  steps  on it carelessly.  Do not be caught  in a trap,  for if you 
are hit by die trap in a bad place,  it would  not be good,**^  If it hits 
you  on the heac^,  your  head  may  break;  if it hits  you  on your  leg, your  
leg may  be cut off, and that  may  make  one go limping  around.  Have  
a good  day (Mr.)  Rat;  greetings  to your  people  at home.  After  getting  
down  (from  the top of the tree),  I will come  to know  your  hole,  and  if 
I'm  not able  to get down,  that  means  that  we would  not  be able  to see 
each  other  again.
'After  I had  finished  my speech,  (Mr.)  Rat  went  on his  way,  looking  
for his daily  bread.  I was  dius  left  alone;  I sat precariously  on die tree. 
After  a long  while,  I began  to hear  the bell; this was die sign  which  
told me that die animals  had finished  their  meeting.  Thus  I quickly  
sat attentively  and  held  on to a lianawhich  curled  around  the tree  on 
which  I was;  I was expecting  the strong  wind  which  (Mr.)  Rat spoke  
to me about  I did  not know  that  the liana  which  I clung  to came  from
71






another  tree.  So when  the wind  began  to blow,  and  the tree  on which  
I was  sitting  was  about  to worship,  the tree  from  which  fixe liana  which  
I was  holding  rose  up, so I began  to swing  in die air (holding  on to the 
liana).  I was still in this (mess)  when  die one on which  I was sitting  
finished  doing  obeisance,  but I was expecting  this time  that  it Would  
get back  up to come  and meet  me. Immediately  it came*back  up, I 
dropped  die liana  and  held  on to the tree.  After  this,  my  own  tree  went . 
back  again  to worship.  As its top went  down,  I^umped  down  before  
it got back  up.
'When  I came  down,  I was  tired,  because  I had  stayed  very  long  on 
the top (of the tree).  I began  to get hungry,  and my stomach  became  
very  flat, so I gendy  sat in a comer  resting.
'It was  not  long  after  I sat down  to take  a rest  when  I heard  a noise  
coming  behind  me;  as I took  a look  (toward  the direction  of the  noise),  
I saw all kinds  of animals  coming  back  from  the meeting,  and they  
were  coming  towards  my direction.  I was terribly  afraid;  I couldn't  
even think of shooting  any of them.  There  were many  powerful  
animals  among  them.  I quickly  took my gun and toqk  to my heels.  
(Blit)  what  surprised  me was  that  wherever  I went,  these  animals  also 
went;  it seemed  as if it was  me that  they  were  actually  looking  for — 
(that was not so), for they were  just going  on their  way — it only  
seemed  in my eyes  as if they  were  following  me.
"As  I was  running  around,  I Saw  a shelter  under  a certain  big  liana,  
which  was full of leaves  and had all kinds  of rubbish  (under  it); it . 
looked  like an tree,  and was  very  big. I stuck  my head  into
this  debris.  When  I pulled  my  head  out,  it was  full of all kinds  of dried  
leaves  and a lot of chips  of wood.
'After  I came  out, I rested  a while.  As I was resting,  I lifted  up my 
eyes  and saw a lot of big birds  flying  around  (in the air), arfd I killed  
one  of them.  I made  a fire  and  roasted  that  one,  and  I ate  it completely.  
After  this,  I went  by one little  stream  that  was  flowing  down  from  tiie 
top of one rock  and used  a large  leave  to take  some  water  to drink.
'When  I had rested  a little  after  this, I got up to look  for the way  I 
needed  to take to get back to my  lodging  place  at tike king of Igbo  
Olodumare's  (place),  but I could  not fold the way  at all. I went  back  
and forth;  there  wasn't  even  a place  that seemed  like a known  place  
to me at all. This  was the position  I was  until  it was  dark  on that  day.
'To cut the long story  short, I want  all people  in the world  to 
know  what  I did: I got lost  in the forest  for three  complete  years.
'During  this  pertod  in which  I got  lost,  I cannot  tell people  with  my 
mouth;  It is difficult  for my hand  to write  for the people  of the world  
about  all the strange  things  and  the  deep  things  tiiat  I saw,  that  I heard,  
that  I interacted  wifli  iiliichalso  met  wifli  me. Even  though  it is true 
that he who has an important  matter  in his mind  and cannot  find 
anyone  with  whom  to snare  the matter,  is like  one  who  is hungry  and 
finds  food,  but must  not eat it;, yet an elderly  man should  not tell 
72






everything  which  he had seen.'I  shall (thus)  tell very  little of those  
things  which  my eyes  saw during  these  three  years  before  I began  to 
see the light  about  my matter.
'For one whole  year,  it was fruit  that constituted  my main  food.  I 
shot several  times  with my gun, to the extent  that I ran out of gun 
powder  in my pocket,  but  the animal  which  I had killed  before  I ran 
out of gun powder  did a lot of good.  When  I ran out of gun  powder,  
I began  to set traps  with  rope  on the tracks  of the animals,  and I was 
using  my machete  to kill fish in the water.  But yet I was walking  
around  the forest,  looking,for  the fruits  of the trees  to edt.
'I made  a home  out of a cave.  After  it had  been  a while  since  I had 
been  living  in the cave,  I repaired  it very  well,  and  I made  all kinds  of 
rooms  out of it. I made  my bedstead  separately;  I gathered  small  
leaves  with  lots of large  leaves.  I made  a pillow  out of this (covered  
leaves)  which  I put on my bedstead.  I got a huge  rock with which  I 
made  a door.  I made  small  holes  on the  top of fixe cave,  which  became  
windows.  Even  though  my cave  was  made  of rock  on all sides,  a part 
of its top was earth;  that  part  was the part  in which  I made  my holes.  
The  big animals  that  were  living  in fixe hol^  before  my  arrival  had  left 
the place  since  I had been  there.
"As I was  going  around  in the forest,  I found  a lot of snails.  It was 
their  shells  that  I was  using  to fetch  water,  and  I lined  them  up in rows  
in my cave.  This  was what  I was doing,  enjoying  the little  happiness  
that  I had as I continued  to go on with  my life (in the forest).
"When  it had been  eight  months  since  I came  in the forest,  a very  
strong  wind  blew  one day, fixe wind  was so strong  that the air was 
filled  with  debris.  As I was  looking  up; I sudderxly  saw  a sheaf  of com  
which  was being  carried  aroxind  by the wind,  and I was observing  
where  the sheaf  of com  was  going  to fall. When  it fell,  it fell on a little  
stream  which  was flowing,  but which  was getting  dry. So I began  to 
pursue  the sheaf  of com  very  quickly,  xintil  it came  to one liarxa  which  
was  on some  stagnant  water;  it was  there  that  I caught  up with  it, and 
I picked  it up. The reason  why  I followed  fixe sheaf  of com  was that  I 
wanted  to lopk  at it (closely)  to be able to determine  whether  or not it 
came  from a place  close by. By this, I might  see a sign that would  
assure  me that I could  still get out  of my confinement.
"When  I looked  at the sheaf  of com,  I could  not see any  sign  which  
indicated  to me that  it came  from  a place  close  to me at all, because  all 
my observations  showed  that  it came  from  a place  very  far away  from  
Igbo  Olodxxmare.  But  a thing  of joy which  I found  in this sheaf  of com  
when  I examined  it very  closely,  was a dried  grain  of com. When  I 
thought  (seriously)  for a long time about  what  I could  possibly  do 
witix this grain  of com  and could  not find anything  (I could  do with  
it), I said, "Please  God,  teach  me the wisdom  about  what  to do wifix  
this grain  of com."  After  this, I took the sheaf  of com into my cave,  
and I slept  xintil  the next  morning.  When  it was  dawn,  it seemed  as if
73






my heart  did not sleep  throiighout  the time  that  I was  sleeping;  it was 
thinking  about  this grain  of born, because  that way, all the things  
about  which  one thinks  (seriously)  are always  easy  to do, if one sleeps  
(for a whale),  and one's  mind  gets to rest (a little).  As soon  as I woke  
up, my mind  told  me to go and  make  a little  farm  and  plant'  the grain  
of com  in it. Finally,  this  com  grew,  almost  like (child's)  play.  The  com  
brought  fortfl  more  grains  (on the cob):  it brought  forth  two  big cobs.  
When  they  came  to maturity . I did  not  eat them;  I kept  them  until  they  
were dried,-  and both had a lot of grains.  When  the raining  season  
came,  I planted  all the grains  that I had on one large  farm  which  I 
made,  and when  my com came to maturity,  I began  to eat. But 
whoever  saw* me at this time would  not be able to recognise  me, 
because  my clothes  were  filthy;  it was true  I tried  to wash  them  in the 
water,  but it did not work,  because  there  was no soap.  I bathed,  but 
leaves  were  my sponge;^^  the worst  of all tilings  about  me was that 
the hair  on my head  and my eyes  were  covered  with  hair  to the  point  
that  it seemed  as if my  hair  had  built  a home  for my  eyes.  After  a while,  
when  I had  gone  by one little  pond^^^  tQ gge myself  — used  water  as ' 
a mirror —when  I got  to this  pond,  and  looked  down,  and  saw  myself, .
I was terribly  scared,  for there  was no difference  between  me and a 
gorilla  at all. After  a while,  when  I thought  (about  it), I saw that a 
person  does  not take care of himself  for others  to see, but a person  
takes  care  of himself  so that  he would  enjoy  (feel  better  about)  himself . 
He  who  takes  care  of himself  just  fqr others  alone  to see  him,  (that  one)  
is a filthy  person.
"Because  of this, I decided  to take  care  of myself.  I did not have  a 
knife  at all, except  a machete,  and I began  to sharpen  my machete.  I 
sharpened  it for a whole  day, and its edge  became  very sharp.  After  
this,  I took  the machete,  and  used  it to shave  my  beard.  But  it was  only  
my beard that I could use the machete  for; I had to leave the 
(over-grown)  hair  of my head,  only  to cany  it around.
"But  besides  the hair  on my head  and my beard,  since  I had been  
in title forest,  I had not been  sad because  I knew  that  wisdom  of the 
elders^^^  which  says ho matter  how.  low the condition  of the son of 
man  is in this  world,  it behoves  one to make  use of (whatever)  oppor ­
tunity  one has in a befitting  way;  it is only  a fool who says "mine  is 
finished  (no more  for me) in the world;"  when  there  is life, there  is 
hope.  My thought  at that time  was this: that  even  if I were  alone,  still 
there  was  life, and the wisdom  in my head^^^  was  different  from  that 
of an animal,  and God who made  a mouth  for me would  not be 
without  the knowledge  of the way  He would  let me find sometiung  
to put in it'^  Thus  I decided  that  if that  was  the place  in which  ! was . 
going  to spend  tiie restof  my life, I might  as well spend  it with  joy;' 
hot if my Creator  said that that was not the place  (wher6  I would  
spend  the rest of my life), a day was coming  when  he would  get me 
out.
74






"But  something  happened  when  it became  three  whole  years  that 
I had been in the forest;  this was it: it happened  one day, when  I 
strolled  into-the  forest,  in search  of fruit;  I saw a lot of tortoises,  but I 
did not see many  snails,  and I was  very  angry,  because  the snail  was 
bigger  than  the kind  of tortoises  we used  to see (around).  It was not 
long  as I went  around  the forest  when  a heavy  rain  began  to fall, and 
I had not reached  my camp  (ground),  so I went  to hide in one little  
cave . But  this  rain  was  very  strong,  and  the  wind  was  blowing  terribly  
(as well).  It was.  not too long  after  I got into the cave,  when  a torrent  
drove  me out,  and  I went  to hide  in another  cave.  In this second  cave,  
the torrent  drove  me out again.  The rain was falling  very  hard,  and 
the wind  was  very,  very  strong;  I had  not experienced  such  (rain  and 
wind)  since  ! had  been  lost  in the forest.  At long  last,  the rain  stopped,  
and I got prepared,  and turned  my head  towards  my camp.  When  I 
got there,  one big tree had fallen  right  in front  of my cave.  The tree 
had rolled  the stone  out of the entrance  of my cave.  When  I looked  
into my cave,  the torrent  had filled  it to the brim,  and I was looking  
at the snail  shells  with  whichlhadfetched  watervery  clearly  (floating)  
on the water,  and the tortoise  shells  which  I had used  as plates  for 
food;  all of them  looked  like boats  on the surface  of the water.  The 
worst  of the whole  matter  was that the fire had been  put out, and I 
had  only  one stick  of match  left in the match  box  before  I left, and the 
rain  had  beaten  the only  stick  of match  to the extent  flmt I almost  lost 
•hope  immediately.  I bellowed  in a loud  voice  saying,  T and  mine  are 
in thy hands,  oh God  the (heavenly)  .Kng.'
"I thought  for a long time,  and I did not know  what  to do; I took  
my bag,  I took  my gun,  and  I headed  into  die forest,  and  I kept  going.
"A^r  a while,  I came  into  one fruit  garden:  it was  full of all kinds  
of sweet  fruits,  those  that  I had  tasted  since  die day  I had  been  lost  (in 
the forest).  I saw pawpaw,  orange,  pineapple,  mango,  red bananas,  
lime, and all kinds  of trees which  came to the land from die four 
comers'of  the world.
"I looked  around  to see if these  fruits  belonged  to someone.  Smre  
Igbo  Ofodumare  was  filled  with  strange  things,  I thought  die orchard  
was  there  for the welfare  of those  who  got lost  in tiie  forest,  so I began  
to eat. After  I had eaten  and was  very  full, I sat and leaned  my back  
on a tree, and I slept.
"I was  deeply  asleep,  because  I was  tired  before  I slept.  As I'began  
to dream  a sweet  dream,  somebody  woke  me up. When  I opened  my 
eyes,  I saw  the fellow;  he was  a very  handsome  young  man  who  wore  
a white  gown  and  had  a white  cap on and.white  pants,  too. I greeted  
him,  and he greeted  me too. After  he had greeted  me,  he asked  me a 
question,  and  he said, "What  are you looking  for in die midst  of our 
garden?"  ,
I answered  and I said,  "How  many  of you does  the garden  belong
to?"
75






''He  answered  and said, "It is my father's  garden.."
'I asked  and I said, "Who  is the father  who  begat  you?"
He ar^wered-  me, and he said, "It is a father  who surpasses  
another  fellow's  father  that  begat  me."
'This  made  me to talk (further),  and I said,  "Even  if the father  who  
begat  you surpasses  another  fellow's  fattier,  still the father  who  begat  
you does  not surpass  the father  who  begat  me. The father  who  begat  
^^yf'^ran,  (and) Akowediran's  father  was Idakeroro-  
ode (imd)  Idakeroro-ode  was  enough  a fattier  for Akowediran,  ^d 
y^owediran  was enough  a father  fof me, Olowo-aiye.  Therefore  
^ere  IS no father  who  is bigger  than  the father  who  begat  me. There-'  
tore,  I plead  with  you  wholeheartedly,  let me know  the big father  who  
begat  you.
'When  I was tluough  with  my talking,  the man  looked  at me and 
hissed,  and he did not respond  to my speech,  but instead,  he turned  
around  and  begun  to leave,  as if he was  going  to reportme  to someone  
important  who  would  punish  me for what  I had  done.
"But I observed  the way thq man went;  after a while,  I looked  
that it was about  to rain again;  within  a short  
w^le,  I began  to hear  some  noise.  It was only  the noise  of the wind.  
When  the wind  blew  over  me, my eyes saw a lot of trouble,  because  
this Wind  was even  stronger  than the one that drove  me out of my 
cave.  When  the wind  reached  me, (what  happened)  was  beyond  what  
a mouth  could  describe:  all fhe trees  were  bumping  their  heads  against  
each  other;  liana  was bumping  against  liana;  the leaves  filled  the air; 
and  palm  leaves  were  naked;  trees  were  squeaking,  and  a host  of them'  
WCTe  falling  by my side.  I was  in this  condition  when  the rain started  
to fall, and the rain beat me to the extent  that I began  to gnash  my 
teeth. I ran to hide myself  under  debris,  but I did not feel 
comfortable,  I hid myself  in a tree-hole  but the wind  was still 
blowing  against  me, and my clothes  were  all wet, and they clung  to 
my body.  This  was the time  that I began  to doubt  if I was  still capable  
of doing  anything  again  in this world.  I was  very  down-hearted,  and 
some  bad, bad thoughts  came  into my mind;  I felt like committing  
suiade.  ®
As I was  thinking  about  {hese  things,  I Icxiked  in front  of me, and 
I saw a very  big rock.  I got up and went  into this rock. When  I got 
there,  I saw a narrow  path  which  went  through  die rock.  I followed  
this path,  so I could  find a place  to hide  my head,  but to my amaze ­
ment,  as soon  as I walked  for about  six steps,  I found  myself  in one 
big house  which  was very,  very  big and was very  beautiful  as well,  
bmce  1 began  going  around  in this  world,  I had  not  seen  such  a house-  
it was even more beautiful  than the palace  of the king of Igbo  
Ult^i^re.  In the four  comers  of the house,  I saw little  birds  which  
iTOked  like swallows  and they  lined  up in rows.  There  were  many  of 
them,  and I do not think  they  were  less than  one thousand/  at all. If a
76






person  tirst  glanced  at them,  he would  pot think  that  they  were  alive,  
because  they did not move;  each stood  (rigidly)  in its position.  The 
birds  were  sleek;  they  were  yellow^^^  gold,  and  their  chests  were
as bright^^^  as silver,  and their beaks  were like ivory.  As I was 
standing  to look  at them,  I suddenly  heajd  them  singing  all at the same  
time;  they  were  praising  God.  The  song  was  so melodious  that  I forgot  
where.  I came nom;  I never  remembered  my suffering  anymore.  I 
opened  my mouth  to th^ extent  that  I was almost  drooping.
"As  I was  listening  to this  melodious  song,  I suddenly  saw  one  door  
open  by tire  wall  dose  to me,  and  there  was  no door  there  when  I came  
in; when  Tlooked  at the doorway,  I saw one terrifying  lion coming  
towards  me. As I turned  to start  runnir^ I could  not find the 
rX^’ay through  which  I came  in. anymore.  I was  running  back  and  forth;  
I did  not know  what  to do, so I hid myself  in one of tire comers  in tire 
house,  expecting  the lion to come  right  on to eat me up. The lion's  
body  was brass,  and was glittering  and was very  beautiful.  It was a 
surprise  to me, that  when  it was  about  six steps  before  the lion  was  to 
reach  me, it stopped  and bellowed  and its voice was like that of 
twenty-thousand  thunders  that struck  at tire same ’ time.
"It was not long after  this when  I saw one beautiful  woman;  she 
was  coming  right  in front  of me, and  I observed  that  there  were  many  
strange  creatures  following  her. they  were  very  beautiful,  and  their  
bodies  were  very  cool  and sleek  like that  of a day-old  baby,  and their  
clothes  were  glittering,  shedding  light  like the noon-sunshine.  When  
this woman  got close  to me arid reached  where  th© brass  (skinned)  
lion  was standing,  she said,  "You,  the Creator's  lion,  the lion  of brass,  
you to whom  a command  was given  to guard  the gate  of the graves,  
get out of the way for me. I took  permission  from  God before  I left 
heaven;  I have  crossed  a black  sea which  is the Sea of Indigo;  I have  
passed  through  the red sea which  is the Sea of Blood,  and I have  told 
thousands  of the dead  who are expecting  the judgement  of God the 
King."
"After  the woman  had spoken  this way,  the lion  moved  back.  The 
woman  brought  out a big book  and showed  it to this lion, It was a 
letter  of authority  with  the seal of God;  when  she showed  this to the 
animal'  the ground  shook,  the ground  opened  its mouth,  and  the  brass  
lion  went  away  through  a hole  in the ground.
"After  the lion had left, this woman  entered  the house  in which  I 
was,  she  and  the  beauties  who  followed.her.  When  I looked  ather  very  
well  ^and  very  closely),  she was my mother;  thus,  I ran towards  her 
to giver  her a big hug,  but she disappeared;  I simply  hugged  the air. 
I ran again  to hug  her the second  time,  but I hugged  nothing  again;  I 
. ran again,  the third  time  to hug  her again;  I hugged  the air. So I burst  
into tears,  and  the the aninjals  behind  her burst  into  laughter,  but  my 
mother  began  to cry with me. Ha! There  is no one like a mother;  
women  love,  children.
77






■ My mother  spoke  and said: "My  jhild,  Olowo-aiye  my child.  My 
eyes have  been  following  you all the way  in your  journey.  When  I 
could  no longer  bear  it,. I sought  perrhissiOn  in heaven  to come  and 
see you (in person).
"Truly  me children  of the world  are very  wise,,  and  the people  in 
heaven  have  a lot of understanding,  but no creature  on earth  or in 
heaven  knows  where  tire key  of a mother's  love  for  her  child-is;  except  
God  alone.  A child  who  w spiteful  to his mother  has broken  tire fiftti  
commandnlent  of God,^®  mat  one has worn  an irksome  gown  over  
the crown  of his head^^^  and has oovered  himself  with  destructive  
cloth.  Olowo-aiye  your  father  told me to treat  you gently  and asked  
me to greet  you  very  well;  he is at rest  on his pillow  df liberty,  which  
God  had  prepared  for tiie dead  who  have  spent  their  lives  very  well.  
You,  my child,  do not be daunted;  your  life is bound  to be good.  It is 
a lazy person  that fears difficulty;  there is no difficulty  before  a 
powerful  man;  the important  people  look  at impediment  as if it were  
nothing  at all, and a mountain  looks  like a plain  before  those  who  are 
powerful.  Do not fear difficulty.  A man  is not daunted  by difficulty.  
A merchant  who sustained  loss at one time,  and quits  his business  
because  of that has spoilt  the world;^^^  farmer  whose  crops  went  
bad  in one year  and  who  quits  farming,  has spoilt  his own  name,  and 
he who  works  lazily  at his work  does  not do evil to any  one else,  but 
himself.  For a lazy  person  wpuld  never  be able to stand'in  the midst  
of important  people;  he would  only  be dealing  with  people  in a low 
category,  and  the la2y  ones  will  not  be able  to stand  in an assembly  of 
the progressive  ones:  they  will always  be in the midst  of those  who  
are behind  forever.
'You,  my son> I heard  that  you have  got married;  please,  take  care 
of your  wife.  Both  tongue  and the mouth  fight  (at times),  but  we have  
never  heard  at any time  that  a tongue  went  to report  the matter  to the 
eyes  and the nose,  that they  should  come  and settle  the fight  between  
them  (tongue  and  the mouth) . Do not  let anyone  get  between  you  and 
your  wife,  no matter  how  close  to you that one may  be. Because  the 
day that you offer the third  person  a chance  to come  between  you,  
your  love  would  be like water  which  someone  has gone  to fetch  with  
a gourd  from  the river,  and  when  he had come  back,  the man's  friend  
takes  a club and hits die gourd,  and the gourd  of water  breaks,  and 
the water  in it flows  out  and  flows  to fire east  and  to west,  to the south  
and to the north,  and no one can gather  the water  together  again.
"You,  nw son, do not forget  the truth  inside  you;  it is stronger  than  
medicine;^™  jg which  one cuts conspiracy;  it is a whip
with which  one beats  hypocrisy;  it is a chain  with  which  one binds  
envy  and hangs  it on the tree.  Truthfulness  from  within  will lead  you 
from one promotion  to the other;  it will lead you from one high  
position  to the other;  it will add more  money  to your  money,  it will 
add more  children  to your children;  it will add more  people  to the 
78






people  (around  you),  and  it will  make  you  very  important  in the  midst  
of all the children  of,the  world.  Tnitti  from  within  will  give  you  a great  
name; those  who  are backbiting  you  will (praise  and)  respect  you in 
your  presence;  tixose  who  were  cursing  in secret  will bow very  low 
when  you  happen  to meet  them;you  would  trample  murderers  under  
your  feet,  and  the  double-dealer^® ’ will  be down-hearted,  and  fee one 
who  befriends  people  only  in good  times  would  stand  by yott  in your  
affliction;  9 powerhd  perwn  will  be soft  like a red banana  before  you,  
and an unfortunate  person  will not come  in your way . Therefore,  
Olowo-aiye  always  deal  wifh  people  with  truth  from  wimin  you  from  
now  until  you  puf  off flie human  body,  when  you  will  dose  your  eyes,  
when  you  will  do as I did,  vdien  you  will  come  to meet  me in heaven.
"'About  your  wife>  do not  be afraid.  She has delivered  a baby,  and 
the  baby  is npt  just  an ordinary  baby;  it is the baby  who  will  edify  your  
name  in the future.  The child  will  not die young,  and  he will  not grow  
into  affliction.  The children  of the world  will not be able  to overcome  
him.  You shall  name  him Akara-ogdn,  because  u wizard  will not be 
able  to devour  him,  and  a witch  will  not  be able  to come  near  him,  and 
a (vicious)  medicine-man  will not be able to harm  him.
"'You,  my son,  I will  not  be able to say more  than  this; the children  
of men  spend  (their)  time as if it would  never  end,  but a minute  has. 
its purposes  in heaven.'
'Thus  did my mother  speak,  and when  she ended  her speech,  she 
gave  me a big  cake  and  said,  "Look,  it is a cake  from  heaven;  I brought  
it for  you;  eat  it in your  wandering  up and  down;  this  is more  delicious  
than the children  of men's  cake; it can never  finish,  no matter  how  
much  you eat it, but I shall get the rest out of your  hand  on tire day 
you get back  home.'
"When  my mother  had finished  her speech,  I also answered  and 
said,  'Mymother,  what  kind  of love is as great  as this?  The one who  
left the comfort  of heaven  behind  and came to me in the 
uncomfortable  world!  With  what  can  I compare  you,  my  mother?  You 
who  were  so good  in the world,  and are also very good  in heaven.  
When  you were  in the world,  you took  care  of me as you should;  you 
played  with me when  one should  play with a child;  you punished  
when  it was necessary  to punish  a child;  you did not talk ill of my 
father  to me, as other  women  do; and you did not spread  bad news  
about  me outside.  Whenever  I did a little thing  for you,  you always  
appreciated  it, and you always  talked  well  about  me to all the people  
(around) . You  never  did let me fall into disgrace  before  my  peers;  you 
did not disclose  my secret  before  friends,  and  you  never  turned  a deaf 
ear to my request  for something  from  you. You did not starve  my 
father;  you  did not disclose  his secret  before  a visitor;  you  did  not talk 
(ill) about  my father  in your  mother's  house  and  thereby  bring  shame  
upon him in his in-law's  house;^®®  I never heard  any insultive  
language  from  you to my father  at any  time,  and  you  never  did (even)
79






once  curse  my father;  .and  you were  not like ill-headed  women  who  
proudly  say that their  husbands  have  no power  (nor  authority)  to do 
mything  to them  — those  who act with  impunity.  You,  my mother,  
just  as God  did  not  forsake  you  in the world,  in the same  way.  He does  
not forsake  you in heaven  as well. When  fire.djes,  it covers  its face 
with  ashes;  when  a banana  dies  it replaces  itself  with  posterity;  I shall  
make  a good  posterity  for you, and as the moon  shines  around  the 
eardr,  so will I spread  your  name  around  on earth.  I shall  not forget  
your advice.  I shall follow  the path  which  you and my father  have  
paved  for me. Your  love  for each  other  shall  be my good  example,!^!  
and I want  you to know  certainly,  that it is easier  for my mouth  to 
forget  food,  for my hand  to forget  the morseL  than'for  me to forget  
what  you  have  done  for me. Good  bye,  my luother;  it is compulsory  
for us to part  today,  because  you  are  no more  in tire  midst  of the living;  
you are among  those in heaven.  Greet  my father  for me, Mr' 
Akowediran,  and do not forget  me, and entreat  the Creator  for me to 
grant  me success  on my way.  Good  bye  my  mother;  go into the grave,  
and continue  to rest from the troubles  of this world,  from the 
afflictions  of the children  of men; we shall see each other  face to face.1^2
"This  was  the way  I spoke  to my  mother,  and  as I was  talking  those  
strange  creatures  began  to depart  one by one. When  I looked  at my 
mother's  face,  she began  to cry, and the water  that  was  coming  opt  of 
her eyes was like big drops  of blood. ^^3 My mother  cried  for (her)  
child.  My head  swelled^^also,  and my mind  was not in this world  
any more,  for since  the day she died,  I had  known  that there  was  no 
sympathetic  love  like (one's)  mother's,  arid only  few people  Could  be 
like (one's)  father.
'Therefore,  when  my mother  was  about  to leave,  I rushed  towards  
her to grip her, but I simply  held  tire air; (she  had disappeared);  I did 
so the second  time,  and my effort  proved  to be nothing.  I did so the 
third  time  yet I could  not get hold  of her. I bellowed  in a melancholic  
tone. Please,  rny mother,  take  me along;  please,  my mother,  take  me 
along,  etc., etc. She left one garment  and a beautiful  pair  of pants  for 
me, and I put  tiiem  on. I folded  my Wet  clothes  and  put diem  in a bag.
This is my advice  to the children  of men:  that  everybody  should  
take care of his parents;  only few can act like mother  and father  
towards  one,  and  when  the parents  have  turned  their  back  (and  have  
parted  this life),  one  is left  alone  —with  God.  There,  while  our  parents  
are still living,  let us take  care of thenv^^S  so that they  may  live long  
(to old age) and  straight  for (our  benefit).  When  we pound  yams,  and 
turn (or make) when we are celebrating  the life that die 
deceased  had lived,  we are only wasting  (our) money:  he who has 
passed  away  has passed  away.  Let us spend  money  when  money  can 
help to save their lives. 167 The money  which  is spent in burial  
ceremony  cannot  bring  the dead  one back  to life. If we-have  spent  a 
80






little like gentlemen,  that should  be enough^Tpo^niuch  -spendihg  
makes  a fool  out of a person;  it keeps'us  in tK¥rategoiy  of stupidity  
which  is the father  of baboons. ,
"After  my mother's  departure,  I picked  up my cake,  and I got out 
of the confines  of that  rock.  When  I came  out, I saw a man  who  wore  
white  clothes,  die  one  whom  I saw  before  I entered  the  hole  of the rock.  
He greeted  me well, and he told me that  his boss  wanted  to see me, 
and  when  I asked  what  the name  of the boss  was,  he said  when  I got 
to him  hejvould  tell me his name  (by himself),  so I followedhim.
"Wewalked  in the forest.  When  we arrived  at a big and  beautiful  
yard  which  was  very  beautiful  indeed,  the man  opened  the gate  to the 
yard  and  we entered;  I saw  a very  big  path  which  went  straight  ahead  
through  one  big  house.  This  was the path  we followed  until  we got to 
the big house;  When  I looked  round,  I saw that  the house  was  on the 
rock,  and  that  all its walls  were  rock  (walls) . This  man  opened  the door  
arid  got in, and I also followed  him.  When  I got into the inner  part  of 
the  house,  I was  afraid  to step  on the  floor,  because  it was  too  beautiful;  
it was glittering,  but I followed  the man  as he went.  It was  nob  until  I 
got  into  the  house  that  I knew  that  it was  a multi-storey  building.  After  
we had  walked  for about  eighteen  steps,  we came  to tire stairway  to 
the upper  storey,  and tire man  began  to climb  until  he got to the top 
there,  so I climbed  along  with  him,  too.  When  we got up,  he turned  to 
the left, and  I turned  there  too;  when  we got to the top floor,  he turned  
to the right again,  so I turned  along  with him, and when  we had 
walked  for about  six steps  after  this,  he turned  to the right  again,  and 
so did I too. After  this then,  I saw one small  ladder;  when  he climbed  
that  (ladder),  I climbed  with  him,  and  when  we got to the top, I found  
myself  on a very flat roof which  was built  completely  witii stone.  I 
saw a huge  man  whose  head  was bald  and whose  beard  was bushy  
enough  that it covered  half of the rock;  he was smoking  a big pipe.  
The man soared  me, to tell the truth. So I bowed  (before  him)  
immediately  without  having  thought  about  what to do before.  
Whether  I liked  it or not,  I began  to bow  (forhim)  just  to avoid  trouble.
"After  this, the man told me to get up, and he opened  his mouth  
and  began  to say, 'Get  up you,  son  of man;  I am the father  with  bushy  
beard  who  lives  on the peak  of the rock.  It has been  a long  time  since  
I have  been  here.  It is more  than  three  thousand  years.  The  place  where  
I am here  is the end  of the universe,  and the wall  which  surrounds  me 
is the dividing  line between  me and those  who  are in heaven.  Right  
here in my compound,  most  of the people  in heaven  come,  and we 
play  with  one another,  and after  you  have  finished  eating,  I shall  take 
you to the house  of the important  gnome,  whose  name  is Death,  for 
he has a house  in heaven  as well as over there, in the boundary  
between  heaven  and earth.  After  we have  greeted  that  gnome,  I shall  
take you to his wife,  because  the woman  lives  separately,  the gnome  
whose  name  is Arun,^^®  a down-hearted  woman.  She is my relative
81






franKmy  .mother's  side, "^e woman's  father  is vpiy  wealthy,  and it 
was  righfTfoiSr3uiaiw5£Rfthat  Antrt  has  been  spoilt  throiigh  too much  
indulgence.  Since  nobody  wanted  to marry  her among  the children  of 
men,  it was  one gnome  that  married  her and took  her th heaven.  She 
is a hypocritical  woman,  and tfie creatures  in heaven  began  to turn  
against  each  other.  At last there  was an outburst  of .war in heaven:  
those  who  loved  the woman  started  an uproar  to the extent  that  the 
matter  came  to the hearing  of Gad  the (heavenly)  King.  When  Arun  
began  to narrate  the matter  before  her creator,  she spoke  
unbecoming^  from  her mouth,  and this  was  why  God  drove  her out 
of heaven.^°^  After this, she discovered  her husband,  (and) Arun  
became  Satan's  wife  for forty-four  whole  years  — Satan  who  was tire 
king  of the city  of hell.  But  on the fifth  month,  the eleventh  day,  in die 
forty-fourth  year,  she ran away  from  hell  because  the smoke  from  the 
fire of hell  was too much  for her, she said.  It was thus  that  Death  got 
permission  from  God  to allow  him to marry  the woman,  so that she 
would  be his help-mate  in his work."'
'Therefore,  you son  of man,  after  you  have  eaten,  there  will  be a big 
celebration;  be ready  and tighten  your  belt^^O  because  your
eyes  are about  to see something.  I salute  you very  much;  welcome;  I 
salute  you for die journey  you've  made;  I salute  you (for your  
endurance  of) the tribulations  in the world;  I salute  you for your  
wandering  in the wilderness;  I congratulate  you on your (days  of 
plenty)  of food  to eat; and salute  you for your  endurance  in the days  
(you  had  nothing)  to eat! How  are your  people?  Is your  wife  in good  
health?  I salute  you  for all your  troubles  in Igbo  Olodumare,  die abode  
of all the strange  creatures  in the  world.  Certainly  you  must  have  come  
across  all kinds  of troubles  (on  your  way);  the sun  must  have  scourged  
you at noon,  and the moon  must  have served  as your  lamp  in the 
night;^71 above  all these,  I say to you, youi son of man,  
perseverance  is the best  measure  of your  sacrifice If you  persevere,  
the rest  of the matter  is insignificant;  at long  last,  you  will  come  to gain  
the most  important  thing  on earth;  that  means  that  one should  spend  
it for others  to the extent  that when  one closes  one's  eyes, the wise  
ones would  say of one, "That  man had done all he could  (to help  
others)."
"Thus  he had spoken,  and these  words  penetrated  into my heart,  
and  when  I began  to respond,  I took  a deep  breath,  cleared  my throat,  
so drat I would  not have  any impediment  in my throat.  After  this, I 
answered  and I said:
"My dear  Baba-Orurungb6n-yeuke,^73  jf yQ^ reached  down  
within  me, you would  have  realized  how  happy  I am for your  speech  
which  is sweeter  than  European  salt in my stomach.^74  j gj.y glad  
that  I came  to know  you today,  and the words  which  you  have  spoken  
are at the very  bottom  of my stomach.  I am surprised  to hear  that  you 
are so close to heaven,  and that it is only a wall that separates  your  
82






house  from  heaven.  Any  timp  that  I am with  you,  I shall  hot take  my 
sacrifice  beyond  the crossBoads;  I shall not go beyond  your wall,  
because  I do not  want  to go to heaven  suddenly  on a sweltering  noon  
time.  And  about  the food  which  you have  spoken,  I thank  you very  
much  for your  hospitality.  (But)  I am not hungry  now;  after  we have  
rested  a little, I mail eat. Concerning  your question  about  Igbo  
Olodumare,  I cannot  lie to you;  my eyes  really  mw  something.^^^  The 
wind  blew  form  long  that  I was  almost  sick,  and  the sun  scourged  me 
to the extent  friatmy  body  was  as hot  as a blacksmith^  fire.  About  my 
wife,  I can tell you that  my wife  is doing  well;  about  my people,  I can 
say  that  they  are  in (perfect)  health  though  it has  been  a long  time  since  
I had  left these  people;  still  whatever  prayer  the son of man  prays  for 
himself  is what  God  accepts  for him;  one's  mind  is one's  priestP^
"But you, my friend,  I-am amazed  to hear foe names  of your  
neighbours,  and I hope  that  whenever  I have  foe chance,  I shall  go to 
meet  them;  I do not think  that I can go to see them  today,  because  it 
is getting  dark,  and I think  foat you and I should  enjoy  each  other  
today and tomorrow,  we shall go to greet your neighbours.  
Olowo^aiye  is my name,  and my father  is foe one  .whose  name  is 
Akowediran.  Today  is a remarkable  day,  when  a man  meets  a man  — 
the day that I get to meet you — you Mr. Old fellow,  Baba-  
Onirungbonl  am very  glad-yeuke  who  lives  on the peak  of foe rock.'  
. "When  I finished  my speech,  both of us got ready to come  
downstairs;  but when  I said, Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  let me help  
you pick up some  of your  beard  (from  foe floor).'  He answered  me 
and  he said,  '1^  dear  Olowo-aiye,  face  your  own  problems,  take  your  
eyes off my beard.'  When  the man  had thus Spoken,  I never  spoke  
about  someone  else's  beard  anymore/1  left  him  who  had  his beard  to 
take  his beard  along  with  him.
"We  playpd  (around)  until  duSk  foat  day;  I was  also  very  happy  at 
foat  time  because,  in the first  place,  it had  been  a long  time  since  I had 
had  someone  to talk  to, with  whom  I could  go in and  out;  in the second  
place,  it had been  long since  I had had decent  clofoes  to wear,  and 
since  I had  been  with  Baba-Onirun^x?n,  I had  put  on the garment  and 
the pant  which  my mofoer  brou^t  for me, and foe clofoes  fitted  me 
very  well,  since  foey  were  sewn  by the artists  from  heaven;  so I began  
to bluff  at Baba-Onirungbon's  place:  I was  walking  around  in a stately  
fashion.
«3






5
The Second  Day at Baba-Onirun-  
gbon-y^uk^'s  Place,  the One who  
Lives  on the Peak  of the Rock
"When  it was dawn  the following  day, after we had eaten,  
Baba-Qnirungbon  reminded  me about  the friends  whom  he said we 
should  go and greet,  and he also suggested  that we shoulc^  go to 
Death's  house  first.  So, we got ourselves  ready,  and we began  to go.
"The  first thing  that surprised  me was the fact that the path to 
Death's  house  was soaked  with blood;  die shrubs  by the way side 
were  soaked  with  blood  as well;  still Baba-Qnirungbon  was stepping  
along  in the blood  without  giving  it a thought,  and Ids beard  began  
to make  me laugh  as it was  dragging  on the ground  along  in the  blood.  •' 
Nothing  (actually)  frightened  me anymore  at that time,  for he who  
has got out of the midst  of men,  and has headed  on to the path  that 
leads  to Igbo  Olodumare,  and on his reaching  there,  begins  to search  
around  for Death,  that One has fettered  his own feet and has tied 
chains  around  his own  waist;  he has squeezed  soma  drops  of pepper  
juice  into his own  eyes,  and he is looking  around  for disaster.  Thus  
Baba-Onirungbon  kept  going,  and I, who did not have  a beard,  also 
followed  him  along.
"After  a while,  we came  upon  Death's  house;  we were  looking  at 
the house  afar off/ and  vyhen  I came  closer,  I saw seven  heaps  which  
were  tall: they  went  far into the sky,  and they  were  filled  with  bones.  
The first heap was filled  with  human  bones,  the second  filled  with  
animals'  bones,  the third  one was (for) snakes,  the fourth  was (for) 
fish,  the fifth  one  was  for birds,  the sixth  was  for ants,  and file ^venth  
(one)  was for flies,  but this seventh  heap  had no bones  like the ones  
before  that:  it had  thread-like  veins,  which  were  foe things  foat  stood  
as bones.
"When  we walked  a Jittle closer  to foe house.  Death  came  out of 
foe house,  for he was coming  to meet  us. He walked  naked;  and he 
held  a cudgel  in his left hand/  and  he held  a human  sk^ull  in his right  
84






hand,  for he is a vicious  creature.  He drank  water  from  a humin  skull.-  
As the mysterious  creature  came  out of his house,  Baba-Onirungbon  
turned  his face to me and said, "See, that's  the important  creature  
coming  right  here.  Death,  whose  house  is between  tnQ earth  and the 
heaven."  Death  is. a vicious  creature,  arid he did not have  any flesh  
on, he was  just  bare  bones.  His eyes  were  as big as a plate  of food,  like 
the moon,  and were  as red as fire and were  rolling  like a big fruit  on 
a tree,  dangling  hnd  being  blown  here  and  there  by the wind.  The (set 
of) teeth  in his mouth  were  like  a lion's;  they were  red indeed,  for 
Death  did.not  enjoy  yam, and he did not enjoy  banana;  he did not 
enjoy  okra nor did he enjoy spinach;  he enjoyed  meat more than  
anyti^g  else.
"Death  was coming  toward  us, and  Baba-Onirungbon  and I were  
going to meet him (as well). We (all) met, he greeted  Baba-  
Onirungbon,  but  he did  not  greet  me.  After  this,  he turned  and  headed  
towards  his house, ’and we also followed  him, and he and Baba-  
Onirungbon  were conversing  as they were going,  but they never  
talked  to me. When  we got to his house,  I was about  to sit down,  but 
Baba-Onirungbon  made  a sign with  his face and told me not to do 
that. But what  surprised  me in the house  were  two things:  the first 
thing  was  the fact that  by the side  of the house  on die right  hand  side,  
all the names  of the diseases  that could  kill people  were (written),  
including  the ones that were so insignificant  in one's  eyes, and die 
ones  that  were  very  frightening  — all of dieir  riames  were  complete  
on the wall. When  I looked  below  those  names,  I saw these  words  
which  were  in bold  letters;  'the filth of the body,  the filth of clothes,  
the filth of food,  die filth  of the air, the filth  of mat,  constipation,  and 
carelessness  at the beginning  of sickness  — these  are the things  that 
take most  children  of men  out of the world  in the morning  time  and 
the noon  day of their  lives.'
"The  second  thing  which  surprised  me was  that  I met  seven  people  
in the house,  and I marvelled  very much  at die condition  in which  I 
saw  them.
"The  first  one sat on a beautiful  chair;  he wore  a velvet  garment  and 
velvet  pants,  and he wore  a velvet  cap y/hich  looked  like a crown  and 
the pair  of shoes  on his feet  were  like gold;  his garment  and  pants  were  
very  beautiful  indeed.  The man  was like a king,  and I was surprised  to 
see such  a handsome  one in the house  of such  an ugly  gnome.
"The  second  one sat down  when  he got in there,  but after  that,  he 
got up, and after that also, he began  to walk;  aftertiat  he sat down  
again.  He was restless:  he looked  like a person  who  was afraid  of a 
(very)  dreadful  thing.  I finally  observed  that  there  was  a little  bcxiklet  
on his chest  and  this  was  what  was  written  in the  bcxik:  'an automobile  
does  not  have  relatives,  a train  doesnot  have  a wife,  and  a motorcycle  
does  not favour^77  anyone;  he who  underrates  steel  will be run over  
by the steel.
.85






'The  third  one was standing.  He had-some  new  trousers  on and a 
new  garment;  but  he had  on an old  man's  cap;178  horrible:
it looked  like an ancient  cap. There  was a paper  on the man's  chest,  
and this was what  was written  on the paper:  'On the day that the 
Creator  judges  the creature,179  pg
grandfatiier  shall  be punished.'
'The fourtii  was a woman;  she, slept  cJn a mat and wds rolling  
around  on the floor  as if she was  having  A great  pain.  The cloth  with  
which  she covered  herself  was a rag, an^ it was on flrat rag that this 
i^cription  was  written:''A  hypocrite  would  fall  from  shame  to shame;  
she is not an upv^ard-bound  jrerson;  she will always  be among  the 
retrogressive  ones  forever.'
"The  fifth  person  was on a ladder  with  many  steps.  He sat on the 
top-most  step when  we entered  the house.  But later,  he came  to the 
next  step down;  later  he came  down  a step again,  and so on; before  
we left the house,  he  was/  sitting  on Are floor.  I observed  a little  piece  
of papCT  on his chest,  and this was  What  was  written  there:  'Just  (like 
a child's)  play,  the slothful  person  finds  himself  in Are midst  of the 
retrogressive  ones;  like  (a child's  play),  he who  is slothful  finds  himself  
in the vault  of heaven.'
'The  sixth  one sat on a beauti^l  chair  .and  covered  himself  with  a 
cloth.  His face was shining,  and his body  was (generally)  cool; Are 
teeth  in his mouth  were  very  white,  and his spuP^O (generally)  
relaxed,  and the cloth which  he used to cover  himself  was very  
beautiful,  and he himself  was very  handsome  indeed.  He was more  
relaxed  than  Death,  and he looked  like a master  of the house.  This  
inscripticm  wds written  on his chest:  'The  mind  of the righteous  is at 
rest like the heart  of him who  had done  no ill to his neighbours  and 
had  kept  nothing  secret  in anybody's  hand;  the heart  of the righteous  
is immaculately  white,  and  his  body  is as ccxjI as the shrub  by water,^®^  
righteous  one stands  firm  like a huge  mountain.'
"The  seventh  one was in a very precarious  situation  indeed.  We 
met  him in a kind  of net made  with  steel;  it looked  like a fisherman's  
net. It had  four  sides;  it stood  upright,  and it was like a house  for Are 
man  J//h^  we got there,  a fire began  to bum  where  this man  was;  it. 
was burning  him, and the man  began  to scream  at intervals,  and he 
was groaning;  he was hissing,  and his whole  surrounding  made  
Death's  house  to be very  frightening.  After  this man's  shouting,  and 
the fire was  out,  I saw a hand  which  held  a whip,  but I did not see the ’ 
owner  oi this hand,  and the hand  began  to whip  this man (right)  in 
the confiriement.  After  a while,  the whip  wore  out, and I saw a hand  
again  which  held  an axe and was  chasing  this man  around  in the net 
and  was  stabbing  him;  I was  scared  when  I saw  his wounds  and  a pool  
of blood,  and  I also  saw  (his)  body-bones  with  my  eyes.  After  this,  this 
^e stopped.  And  I saw  a hand  again  with  ground  pepper,  and  it took  
the pepper  and rubbed  it on Are man's  wounds,  and Are man  started  
86






running  around  again.  I was so panicked  to the extent  that I almost  
ran out. Later,  I suddenly  saw hot water  raining  on this man from  
above,  and his skin began  to peel away  very  badly.  When  this was 
stoppled,  a chain  came  from  above  and chained  him  up. Jt was  in this 
(condition)  that -left him when we moved  away from this 
shameless  creature^  Death,  who  lives  mid-way  between  die earth  and 
t(ie heaven.
'Going  on with  my story,  a little  while  after  we had  been  in Death's  
house,  Baba-Onirungbon  introduced  me to him, he said, "You  my 
dear  friend.  Death,  whose  house  is mid-way  between  the earth  and 
the heaven,  without  any doubt,  you.  must  have  noted  the one who  is 
following  me; to tell the truth,  you must have been interested  in 
knowing  the type  of person  he is—it is true:  the man  you  are looking  
behind  me, is a friend  of mine,  and  he is one  of tire human  beings  too. 
He is Olowo-aiye,  who  has come  to Igbo  Olodumare  to hunt.  It was 
just yesterday  that  he arrived  at my place,  and since  he has  been  with  
me, I have  observed  that  he is a go^  person  indeed.  If we  have  to talk 
about  his  wholesomeriess,  we  would  not  only  say  that  two  hundred^  
faces  know  him,  but  we  would  have  to say three  thousands  facds  know  
him.  He is the one we should  have  named  Olowo-aiyfe,  a man  whom  
one thousand  faces  know.  In order  that  I may  not drag  my point  out 
tpo long  like the endless  earth  arid like an endless  mat, I am glad  to 
tell you that  since  the time  that  the man  arrived  at my place,  we have  
been  playing,  and enjoying  each  other,  and since  you,  my friend,  are 
my neighbour  who has been  taking  care of me before  his arrival,  I 
deem  it fit, as it behoves  me, that  he and  I should  come  (to see you)  so 
that,the  three  of us should  (meet)  and see one another  face to face.  
Therefore,  Olowo-aiye  is an important  person,  and you too are an 
important  gnome  as well; (both)  of you are not among  the kind of 
friends  who  should  be ignored;!^  may  God  not ignore  anyone  of us. 
I greet  you  — it's been  such  a long  long  time  since  we have  seen  each  
other  that I hope  you are keeping  filings  on the right  track;  I am als6 
getting  on with  my  life as deemed  by my  Creator,  I, your  one and  only  
important  friend,  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  who lives  on the peak  of 
the rock.'
"Thus  did  Baba-Onirungbon  speak  about  me,  and  as he was  saying  
these  filings,  1 too had forgotten  that it was in Death's  house  that  we 
were standing;  I also stood  like an important  person;  I placed  my 
hands  on my hip, as an important  person  should  do before  (another)  
important  person;  I stood  as a powerful  one should-  stand  before  
(another)  powerful  one. As he was taljking,  I was also nodding  my 
head  as a sign  t<k show  that  I was  enjoying  the speech  from  my friend's  
mouth,  for he who  puts  one on the throne  expects  one to bdiave  like 
a. dignified  person;  he who  puts  a garment  on one expects
that  one  to behave  like  and  important  person;  as my  friend  was  saying  
good  filings  about  me, I was also speaking  in a gentle  and low voice
87i:
'I






in his ear saying,  "Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  thanks,  "yes; Baba-  
Onirungbon-yeuke,  thanks,  etc., etc."
When  the mafi^ded-his  speech,  instead  of Death  giving  a short  
answer,  he gave a very long answer;  The  voice  of the creature  was 
terrifying  indeed^  for when  I first heard  it, it sounded  like a great  
thunder  from  the sky, and his throat  waS vibrating  as if a great  rain 
was about  to fall. Death  said:
'I am Death,  I am the important  one who  is the messenger  of God,,  
the axe of God the (heavenly)  King, who cuts people  down  and 
uproots  the rpots  of all the great  ones,  who  takes  away  father  from  the 
one  who  had  a father,  who  takes  a mother  away  from  the one  who  has 
a mother;  I have  taken  a child  from  the one who had a child;  I have
• taken  people  away  from the one who had people;  I have taken  a, 
husband  away  from  the one who  had  a husband;  I have  taken  a wife  
away  from  the one  who  had  a wife;  I have  separated  lovers  from  each  
other;  I have  taken  away  friends  from  friends  — one from  the other,.  
I have  brought  down  the loads  of a famous  one;^®^  j have  brought  a) 
change  in the life of the wealthy  one;  I have  eliminated  the face  of flie 
sophisticated  bhe;^®®  the cock had crowed  behind  file back of the 
powerful  one; I have taken  theheautiful  one away  from  the earth;  I 
have made,  file wise ones to become  inhabitants  of coffins;  I have  
closed  the eyes of important  personalities,  including  the youfig  
healfiiy  man,  the elderly  ories,  male  and  feniales/black  And  white,  the 
red ones  — they  have  all fallen  before  mb.' She  who  had  been  tying  a 
head-band,  .on her head before  an assembly  of people  has been  
reduced  to a person  who cannot  talk before  an assembly  of people  
anymore,  and  within  the honourtwhich  God  the (heavenly)  King  had 
given  me, I brought  tears  into  the eyes  ofthe  children  of men;^®^  j have  
made them  become  those,  who^run  around  (helter  skelter);  1 have  
made  them  roll on the ground;  I have  made  them  hang  fiieir  heads,  
and  hiss,  cry, and  sigh;  I, the only  one.  Dea  th, am  indeed  an important  
and a great  gnome  whose  house  isjnid-'way  betwerai  file earth  and 
the heaven.
"You  son of man,  I thank  you today  for coming  to greet  mein  my 
house,  and I waht  to send  you  with  a message  for the children  of the. 
world;  today  is the sixteenth  day  of the eleventh  month  in thenineteen  
hundred  and forty-third  year after the death  of our Lord,  .that the 
childrenof  men  should  (please  forgive  me for asking)  reduce  my  work  
a little  bit by taking  care  of themselves.
"These  you have seen  in my house  are given  to me by God (file 
heavenly)  King.  One  of them  does  not live in my house,  but he only  
came  to visit  me today,  for heaven  is his  home;  but the remaining  six 
are mine,  and  God  (the  heavenly)  King  had  ordered  me that  I should  
make them as examples  for the children  of file world,  who come  
within  my domain.'Listen  and  hear  fiieir.story;  hear  what  made  them  
leave  the world  and  become  pilgrims  in heaven:
88






'The  first  one  was  old before  he left the world.  He never  behaved  
viciously;  he never  lied;  he never  slandered  his nei^bour;  he never  
conspired  against  anyone,  he never  went  to an Ha priest^®®  in order  to 
destroy  his neighbour's  life; he never committed  perjury  with  
impunity  — in disregarding  God's  judgement  — he was never  lazy,,  
neither  did he disrespect  the elders,  and  he did  not behave  viciously  
at any time.  Because  of these  things,  when  he became  ninety  years  of 
age,  God  cdledhim  out  of the sorrow  of the world,  so he would  come  
to enjoy  (eternal  bliss)  in heaven.  It is only  today  that  he came  to greet  
me, as I had told  you before,  and he will go back to heaven  very  
shortly.  J, J .
"The  second  one left the world  before  the time  that  God  had given  
him was up: he had eyes,  but he did not see; he had  wisdom,  but he 
did not use it;l®’ and he destroyed  his own life through  (his own)  
stupidity.  When  he was bluffing,  he would  not get off the road for 
automobiles;  he. would  not yield  to the motorcycles  — so that the 
people  Would  not make  fun  of him ke would  walk  on the railroad,  
and stand in the way of the lumber  trucks;  he would  play with  
poisonous  snakes,  and he was never  careful  with  ’scorpions;  he was 
Walking  around  in tiie middle  of the night;  he was  goihg  about  in the 
midst  of a strong  wind;  even  when  he could  not swim,  he was still 
playing  in the deep water;  he used to eat all kinds  of bad foods  in 
people's  houses.  He used  to behave  slugmshly  on earth,  and  he who  
does  such  things  is simply  tempting  GocP^  the (heavenly)  King.  He 
is making  fun of God  — he is preparing  for (his) day of destruction.  
Because  of this,  it happened  one  day  when  the man  did  not  look  where  
he was going  (in front  of him),  one big automobile  ran over  him;  he 
fell  down,  and  his  heart  did  not  beat  anymore,  and  I have  been  ordered  
by God  that  he whose  heart  ceases  to beat  I should  bring  before  Him.  
Thus  the  man  closed  his eyes  and  bade  the world  goodbye.
"The  third  one was a gentle  person,  but  his great  grandfather  was 
more  vicious  than  a poison,  and  the Creator  had  promised  to visit  the 
fattier's  sin bpon  the children  until  the third  and fourth  generations,  
for  he who  behaves  according  to his (God's)  will,  that  fellow's  son  will 
be rewarded  in the future.  So,  when  God  remembered  the man's  great  
grandfather's  sin,^^^  he sent  me to go and  bring  him.
."The  fourth  one  was  a beautiful  woman  in the world,  but she was 
a hypocrite;  when  she was a maiden,  she was envious  of her peers;  
she was causing  a feud  among  two friends.  Seven  men  proposed  to 
many  her, and she agreed  to marry  all seven  of them,  and after  all 
was said  and done,  die did not marry  any  one  of them.  At the end  of 
the matter,  onetof  these  men  viciously  dealt  with  her (in vengeance):  
he used  a deadly  medicine^^^  against  her, and  the lady's  blood  ceased  
to flow,  and when  her heart  did not beat  anymore,  I went  to do the 
job given  to me by God:  I took  her soul (out  of her body),  and there  
was  a great  sorrow  in her  home.
89






"The  fifth  one destroyed  his own life because  of carelessi>ess.  He 
only  stumbled  (on a stone)  with,  his toe, but he did not care to take 
care  of the toe, so it developed  into a big sore, and if did.not  heal  on 
.time:  it was infected  by a bad germ.  After  the sore had  healed,  tine 
germ  sat (tightly)  in his body,  and made  his body  its home.  At long  
last, all kinds  of diseases  began  to afflict  this man;  one disease  began  
to cause  the other,  but all of them  were  started  by just the one genn  
of the other  day. At long  last,'various  germs  went  into the crown  of, 
the head  of the man, and Ris head  over-turned;^^  he began'  to go 
around  naked  from  one town  to the other;  his hair  was  bushjrXnd  was 
as red as the shrub  by the dusty  highway;  he was sleeping  in tfie dust  
outside,  and  he was  eating  leftovers  around  people's  homes.  Children  
were  throwing  rocks  at him as he was  walking  along.  It was  because  
of all these  things  that  he became  sick;  after  a lor>g  while,  the sickness  
got to the point  that  his heart  never  beat  again  — I also  went  there  to 
take  him  to my Creator.
"The  sixth  one was a well-behaved  person^®^  among  the children  
of men, but if he had stayed  longer  jn the world,  he would  have  
suffered  many  things,  because  he would  have  been  greatly  sick,  and 
there  would  not have  been  any physician  who  would  have  been  able 
to cure  him;  and  this sickness  would  have  quickly  killed  him;  it would  
have  afflicted  him  for a tong  time  before  I could  go to take  him.  If this 
sickness  did nottome  upon  this man,  there  would  have  been  a great  
fight in which  nation  would  have risen against  nation,^^^  and one 
government  against  the other  goverrjment,  and this man  wouldhave  
been  the cause  of the fight,  and his name  would  have  bemjspoiled  
from  one generation  to the other.  It was because  of these  dungs  that 
God  had  ordered  me to come  and  take  him  and  bring  him  before  Him.
"The seventh  person  was a man without  a purpose.He  was 
never  among  the mediators  in the world;  he Was a slanderer.  He 
ascended  to a high position  through  (his) hypocrisy.  After  he had 
ascended  to a high  position,  he forbade  other  people's  hands-to  reach  
the top, and such  a thing  was abominable  before  God;  it was also  an , 
abominaticm  before  the creatures  in heaven  for the one who had 
ascended  to the top to be a stumbling  block  to those  who  are coming  
behind,^ and diis man  forgot  the people  in the world,  and  he forgot  
those  in heaven  and  again,  he had  forgotten  Gpd  (tine  heavenly)  King.  
He was a person  of bad behaviour;  there  were  bad attitudes  in his 
hands;^ ’® ttrere  was  a habit  of greed  in his bosom,  and  he was  a child . 
of darkness,  too.l^  This  man  was  filled  witfx-bribery,  and  he was die 
head  of the prevaricators;  he was the ririg-leader  of those  who  sneak  
around  in the middle  of die night.  He had spoiled  people's  job widi  
his mouth,  and he had covered  other  people's  good  job with  a large  
pOtsherd,^^  so that  the people  of the world  might  not See dieir  good  
deeds,  and he always  looked  for secret  places  in order  to ensnare  his 
neighbours,  and he used to enlarge  their little mistakes  before  the 
90






children  of the world.  He made  the world  to turn Upside-down,  he 
enthroned  the liar^^^  and brought  doWn  the righteous  because  he 
(himself)  is a lowly  person,  and  he would  never  cope  with  die people  
at the top forever.  When  this man was in the world,  the Creator's  
language  was  not  apprehended  by the children  of men,  for God  gave  
him money;  God gave him children;  God gave him vety many  
treasures  in the world.  And  those  things  would  not  last  in his hands,  
(but they  were  given  to him)  so that this fall would  be great  indeed.  
When  he reached  the peak  ohhis  fame,  God  brought  him down,  and 
he became  a retrogressive  person;^^^  sorrow  came  over  him,  he was 
downhearted,  and  his name  was  so bad  in the world  to the extent  that 
people  eschewectgiving  that  same  name  to their  children.^®^  One  day, 
my Creator  told me to go and bring  him,  so that the children  of the 
world  would  know that there was not (such a thing)  as 
unrighteousness  in the good  hands  of God,'^®^  no one would  escape  
the reward  of  his  hand  work,  be it here  on earth  or in heaven.  Behold,  
you have  seen  how  the man  is being  punished  in my house,  do not 
think  that  we are being  wicked  to him,  because  when  this  man  was  in 
the world  and  was in a high  position  and ordered  .that  many  people  
should  be beheaded,  and  many  should  be wounded,  and  he inflicted . 
vicious  punishment  upon a host of people  without  any reason,  
remember  that  God  loved  the children  of the world  very  much^^^  that  
he gave  all dungs  in the world  — as much  as die world  is filled  with  
various  things  — he endowed  the children  of the world  widi those  
things.  This  man  whom  you  are looking  at had inflicted  punishment  
upon  the people  whom  God  loved  with  unspeakable  love.  Whatever  
anyone  sows,  die same  shall  grow  for him (to reap).^^^
'T do not want  to say very  much  now;  you  son  of man,  I welcome  
you and I salute  my friend  for his hospitality;  my very dear Mr. 
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  who  lives  on the peak  of die rock.'
"Thus  did die great  gnome  speak  th us. Death,,  the creature  who  
never  favoured  anyone,  who  never  thought,  'this  man  is a noble  man,  
let me leave  him,'  vdiose  house  was midway  between  die earth  and 
the heaven.
"Before  he finished  his speech,  I had relaxed,  and I had decided  to 
Say  good  things  to him  so tiiat  I would  be able  to get  outof  there  (alive) . 
I answered,  and I said:
"You  great  gnome.  Death,  whose  house  is midway  between  die 
earth  and the heaven,  I thank  you. Authority  has been  given  to you 
over  all things  in die  world,  over  all living  things.  You  have  been  given  
authority  over  die king  and  the royal  dynasty,  over  the wealthy  and 
the poor,  over  die physician  and die herbalists.  You  have  power  over  
the beasts  in die torest  and  over  the snake  which  crawls  upon  its belly,  
the lion  and  the  wild  boar,  the  hyena  and  the elephant,  the python  and 
all (odier)  snakes.  You  have  power  over  die-birds  which  fly in die air 
and  over  die fish in the ocean,  over  the shrub  on the ground  and  over
91






the little  ants,  lhe  warriors  who  have  passed  away,  you  were  the one 
who took therti away;  those who spoke  and their speech  became  
effective,  you  Have  taken  away  from  the earth.  The  julportant  people  
in the party  and the big people  in the coundl,  yoUnave  taken  away,  
and I am happy  today  to have  known  a big creature  like you.  I thank  
you for all the words  you have spoken,  and I dihll deliver  your  
message  to the children  of the world;  I shall not be rwetitious  (in 
..doing  so, I shall  deliver  all you  have  spoken  to them),-297  foerefore,  I. 
want  you fo allow  me to leave  today,  .! shall come  hack  to see you 
tomorrow;  I was  doing  something  which  I left in orde"r  to come  to see
• you face to face;  therefore,  good  bye  for noyr;  I am going  home  to my 
friend  — three  men  in one — Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  who  lives  pn 
the-peak  of ttxe rock.' '
"When  I finished  my speech.  Death  and I^reeted  each  other>  v/e 
did not shake  hands,  neither  did one prostrate  for one  other;  instead  
of those  things,  we nodded  to each  other/^d  then  hade  each  other  
good bye and prayed  ttiat God might  brihg  us togefoer  in peace  
tomorrow  .2*^®
"Thus  my friend  and I left the house  of the vicious  spirit,  and we 
went  on our way;  when  we were  on our way back,  I asked  Baba-  
Onirungbpn-yeuke  why  he forbade  me, by his conspicuous  blinking  
of his eyes,  to neidxer  shake  hand  with  Death,  nor prostrate  for the 
gnome,  and that I should  be careful  while I was on his mat; he 
answered  me and hesgid,  'He who shakes  hands  with  Death,  that 
fellow's  own  (life)  is finished;  he wht>prostrates  for him  that  fellow's  
own  (life)  is lost, and  he who  sits on his mat;  that  fellow's  own  (life)  
would  ascend  to the vault  of heaVen.' ■ /
"When  Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke  told  me this,  thematter  mystified  
me, and I was  afraid  even  more  — all the evil things  in the creature's  
house  began  to throb  gen  tly below  my  itavel.^® ’ I who  had  a wife,  and 
with  whom  I had  hot lived  for long,  I (certainly)  did not want  to end 
my life in foe world;  furthermore,  I, who  had  just  heard  that I had  a
■ new  baby  and had not seen  foe baby  wifo  my eyes,  wouldjnot  want  
, my  life to be lost;  I who  had  been  suffering  around  in the world,  who  
had  never  enjoyed  foe  woiid,  would  not  want  to be ready  to go to the 
vault  of heaven.  I told my friend:  \
"You  my friend>  if you  find  my  feet  in fois  your  neighbour's  house  
again,  you  can say that  it was  not my father  who  begat  me.^t*^
"Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  also answered  me and he said, "No 
matter  how  much  you  want  to avoid  him,  I think  you  have  to go foere  
tomorrow,  because  you  have  promised  him,  and it fous  behovesyou  
to fulfil)  your  promise.'
"He  hardly  finished  his speech  when  I also angered  him;  I said,  
'I will not fulfill  my promises.'
"After  I had fous spoken,  Baba-Onirungbpn-y^uk^,laughed;  he 
said, "My friend,.!  foought  you were foe one who was promising  
92






before  the man  now,  and  your  mouth  was  speaking  so firmly?"'  ,
"I also answered,  and I said.  Yes,  what  if my mouthwas  speaking  
so firmly?  Do you think  that  one severs  a seed  from  a palm-nut  with  
a gentle  face?  You (yourself)  saw die man's  face like a fire; you saw 
his nails  like those  of a leopard,  and  you  were  still asking  me to speak  
well;  don't  you know  tfiat whether  or not I wanted  to, I had to say 
good  things  before  the man?"
"Baba-Onirungl?on  answered  again  and said, "Well,  that is not 
proper;  we-dtoyM  always  promise  and we should  (try) to fulfil  our 
■promises;  we ought  to-go  to the rnan's  house  tomorrow."
"After  he h^ thus  spoken^  I shouted  in a very  loud  voice;  I said,  
"Reach  whose  house?  Kaba-Onirungbon,  reach  whose  house?"
"He  also  answered  again,  he said,  "Reach  who  else's  house?  What  
about  Death's  house!"
"I then became  angry:  I said, "It is your  head that would  reach  
Death's  house;  it is your  chest  that  would  redch-Death's  house;  you 
bushy-bearded  fellow."
"After  I had  thus  spoken,  Baba-Qnirungbon  also  answered  me,  and 
he said, "My  beard  may be bushy  or not bushy;  we must  r^ch  the 
man's  house  tomorrow.  Whether  you like it or not,!  shall  drag  you 
there;  even  if I have  to carry  you,  I will carry  you."
"When  the man  had  thus  spoken,  I said,  "Baba-Onirungbon,  I don't  
like  that!  Lcxik  at his  beard  as it is dragging  vigorously  on the  ground."
"But  instead  of his being  angry,  he also answered  me, he said, "I 
thought  you  were  resting  your  arms  on your  hip at that  time?  Let me 
tell you, I have  now  decided  within  myself  that I am going  to throw  
one big party  to rejoice  because  of you and invite  the gnomes  of Igbo  
Olodumare  to the party;  I also have it in mind  to make  Death  the 
chairman,  and  name  Disease  as his assistant,  and  make  you  the guest  
of honour  in their  midst."
"After  he had thus spoken,  I was afraid,  and I said, 'I have  now  
been  pressed  against  the wall;  I have  taken  my sacrifice  beyond  the 
mosques;  I had  eaten  with  pork;  I have  roasted  a green  plantain
for  a white  man  to eat;  I have  told  Hausa  man  to stop  eating  kolanut,^!^  
I have  told  a Yoruba  fellow  not  to eat This  matter  exasperated
me to'the  extent  that I stopped.talking  to Baba-  Onirungbon-yeuke  
until  we got home.
"When  we got home,  I decided  to apologize  to him. I said that I 
could  not go back to Death's  house  anymore.  After this, Baba-  
Onifungbon  replied  to me and his reply was full of very much  
wisdom.  He answered  and said.
"Olowo-aiye,  there  is something  fliat I want  to tell you today;  I 
want  you to take  note  of something  and learn  to be wise  by it. If you 
see a person  who  promise  iid fails to fulfil  it, I want  you to know  
that person  is undependable.  When  a g^tleman  speaks,  people  
should  be able to find  his words  to be so,^^ a gentleman's  promise
93






is like  a chain  with  which  he has bound  himself;  without  his fulfilling 
his promise  the chain  remains  bound.  A frivolbus  person  counts  a 
promise  as a joke;  if he says  this today,  he would  say that  tomorrow,  
and the whole  world  would  .count  his words  to be Weightless,  to the 
extent  that there  is nothing  he says that the children  of the world  
would  not count  as a mere  levity.  Olowo-aiye,  you are a gentleman;  
no matter  how  bad the matter  might  be, I want  you to act according  
to your  promise.  This  is what  I'can  do; I shall  not  invite  Death  to come  
and  eat at the banquet  because  of you anymore,  and when  we get to 
the house  of the gnome,  we will  not  go in; instead  of tiiat,  we vdllstay  
outside  and  tell  him  that  we are  just  going  out,  and  we decided  to visit  
him,  according  to our promise  to him.
"When  the man  finished  this speech,  I revised  my thou^t,  for I 
had seen that the matter  had already  been  decided,-^!®  j jj, gg 
prepared  for the next day; whether  I liked  it or not, I had to h^ad  
towards  the patfi that led. to Death's  house  — he whose  house  was 
mid-way  between  the earth  and the heaven."
94






6
The Third  Day at Baba-Onirun-  
gbon-yeuke's  Place
r*
"I did not sleep  (a wink)  till the following  day.  The  only  one time  that 
I closed  my eyes,  I began  to dream  a bad dream.  I saw a bad fairy  in 
my dream;  he was chasing  me around.  As the fairy  was chasing  me 
along,  I met  one snake  on the way,  and  his teeth  were  like die teeth  of 
a lion; as I was running  away  from  that,  I saw an animal  which  was 
not fat: it looked  lilje a sick animal  whose  nails  were  very  long;  this 
one also terrified  me;2f  7 after  that,  I woke  up. When  I woke  up, I was 
panting  like one who  was running  a race,  and my heart  was beating  
very loudly  like an aeroplane.  Ha! My eyes saw something  in Igbo  
Olodiunare  — my eyes  saw something  (indeed).
After  I had  eaten  breakfast  with  Baba-Onirungbonon  this second  
day, I told him to let us go to (Mr.)  Death's  house  before  we set our 
hands  on anything  that  we planned  to do (on that  day),  he too agreed  
with me. When  we got there,  we did not firid die fairy  at home,  but 
we left a message  for him so that  whenever  he returned,  they  should  
give our message  to him. Thus  I came  back  joyfully  to my friend's  
house,  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  who  was  living  on the hillock  of the 
rock.
"This  friend  of mine  was very  hospitable  to me; he did not  let me 
touch  the cake which  my mother  brought  for me horn  die dome  of 
heaven.
"When  we came  back,  and  after  we had  finished  eating  the second  
time,  Baba-Onirungbon  took  me up to his upper  storey,  and  when  we 
got there,  he took  a seat,  and I took  a seat;  both  of us were  facing  each  
other;  he then  told  me that  the important  thing  that  we were  to do was 
the matter  he was  going  to discuss  with  me.  After  he had  told  me this, 
I was also happy;  I adjusted  my seat very  well,  I told  my new  friend  
that I was listening,  and that he should  go on witii  his speech.  Thus  
the man  started  to speak,  and  he said:
'Without  any doubt,  you must  have  been  surprised  by suddenly  
meeting  me in this forest  when  you came  here three  days  ago. You
95






cannot  understand  the type of person  I am, nor the nature  of the 
conditions  in which  I am, if I do not tell you.  I, as you are looking  at 
me, am partly  human  and partly  gnomish,  why?  Because  my father  
was  human,  and  he was  a hunter  too. The time  that  I am now  talking  
about  is long,  long  time ago; but my father  was the oldest  of all the 
himters  in the world  at ttie time  when  I was  bom.  My  mother  was  not 
a human  being  at all, she was a gnome.  But my mother  was very  
beautiful  indeed.  As it was the trait of most  beautiful  women,  my 
mother  was very  proud;  the notably  important  gnomes  who were  
interested  in her  when  she  was  a girl  didnot  get  a favourable  reception  
from  her, until  those  honourable  ones  left  her, and  it became  difficult  
for her to find a husband.  At long last, my father  found  her in the - 
forest,  and he married  her, as the story  goes. My father  had heard  
about  the fairy,  and he began  to look  for her arormd.  In those  days,  
women  were  wiser  than  those  (women)  of today,  because  they  did  not 
many  men  just because  of their  bluffing  alone,  they did not marry  
men  just  because  of their  handsomeness  alone,  but they  married  men  
if the men  were  powerful  men,  if they  had  a deep  love  that  could  not 
fade, if they recognized  what was.  right as right, and. what was 
befitting  as what  was  befitting;  for if a person  recognizes  what  is right  
as what  is right,  and what  is befitting  as what  is befitting,  we Would  
not  find  the  person  doing  something  that  does  not  befit  the son  of man.  
Therefore,  at this time,  my mother  took  my father  into the rocks  of 
their  home,  and they  tested  him.  There,  my father  fought  a lion;  he 
killed  a lion  with  an axe; my father  fought  with  a leopard;  my father  
fought  a python,  and killed  the python  with a whip,  and he spent  
seven  days  without  food.
"When  my father  completed  this test, tire woman  then  asked  him,  
and.she  said,  'Why  do you love  me?'  And  my father  answered  like a 
wise  man,  and  he said,  'I love  you,  but I do not understand  the reason.  
myself;2^8  whenever  I see jlou, I simply  love you.' The woman  
answered;  and she said,  'I will  marry  you;  you  wise  man,  because  the 
most complete  love is the love for which  one cannot  explain  the 
reason;  if a ptferson  loves  someone  because  of his brilliance,^!®  if she 
marries  him  because  of his bluffing,  if she marries  him  because  of the 
words  of hid mouth,  if she marries  him  because  of the way  he walks,  
the love would  not amount  to anything.  Because  a day will come,  
when  these  tilings  might  be gone,  or you might  be tired  of them;  but 
if you love a person  and you cannot  tell exactly  why  you love  him,  
your  love  is a complete  love.  Therefore,  I will  many  you;  you  are going  
to be ttie fatixer  of my home.'^®
"Ybu,  my friend,  thus  did  my father  marry  my mother,  and  by the 
time  that  I was  born,  my  mother,  in as much  as she  was  herself  -4 fairy,  
she  gently  sneaked  to the dome  of heaven,  and  she  plucked  one  of the 
fruits  of  tile tree  of life, she  gave  it to me,  and  I ate it, thus  Lcanhot  die 
forever.  Butvtiien  God  the (heavenly)  King  learned  of this,  he ordered  
96






the angels  to come  and take me after  I had lived  among  the children  
of men for seventy  years,  and bring  me close  to the gate of heaven.*  . 
This  was  why  you  found  me here,  where  I can  hear  the cock  crowing  
from  heaven.  I, the only  one Baba-Onirungbont-yeuke,  who lives  on 
the hillock  of die rock. '
'''But  you, my friend, ’when  I was in the midst  of the children  of 
meh,  I saw a lot of their  secrets.  Let me  speak  a little  bit about  one of 
their  bad attitudes  which  they  .always  showed;  let us talk about  their  
envy.
'"I am telling  you, if the world  had changed  to the extent  that a 
sheep  became  pregnant  with  a baby  goat,  and a cat becarne  pregnant  
with a rooster,,  an envious  person  will never  be happy  forever.  An 
envious  person  does  not  want  another  person  to progress  except  him;  
an envious  person  does  not  want  another  person  to be brillian t, except  
him;  an envious  person  does  not  have  anyone  else,  except  himself;  an 
envious  person  does  not  want  pother  person  to build  a house,  except  
' him;  an envious  person  does  not want  another  person's  child  to be in 
a high  post,  except  his own  child;  an envious  person  does  not want  
another  person  to have  a sdccessful  child,  except  his own  child;  the 
world  is replete  with  people,  and we cannot  be without  diose  who  
would  make  progress  in those  ways,  and  as they  progress,  an envious  
person  would  continue  to be downhearted;  therefore,  an envious  
person  can never  be happy  forever,  even  if the earth  changed  and 
became  heaven.
"'Listen,  let me tell you  a short  story:
"'One  day,  when  I was  among  the children  of men,  there  was  a man  
near  our house;  die man  was  very  poor,  and  he had  a wife.  This  wife  
loved  her husband  very  much.  For long  as they  were  in adversity,  
she never  left her husband  even  for a day.
"'At  long  last;  one  wealthy  man  decided  to help  this  poor  man.  This  
wealthy  man  had  a piece  of land  which  was  filled  with  palm  bees.  He 
called  this man  and arranged  with  him  to tap palm  wine^^l  on these  
palm trees; after tapping  the wine,  and after selling  the wine,  the 
proceeds  should  be divid^  equally  (between  both  of them).  He gave  
tills  poor  man  some  money  which  he needed  to buy  some  gourds  and 
all  wine  tapping  equipment.  This  man  was  happy,  and  he got ready  
one day, and he went  to th© farm;  he tapped  the wine,'and  he tied 
those  gourds  around  tiie trunk  of the palm  trees,  with  tiie hope  that 
on  tiie  next  day  when  he got  tiiere,  he  would  find  wine  in those  gourds,  
and  he would  sell the wine,  and  he and  the wealthy  man  would  share  
the proceeds  equally.  On tiie next  day,  when  this  man  went  to check  
the gourds,  he found  them  broken  on me ground.  This  mystified,  bipi 
greatly,  and  it was  a very  painful  experience  for him.
'"When  he returned  home,  he took  the small  amount  of money  
which  he had, and bou^t  otiier  gourds,  and he went  to tie tiiem  
around  the  neck  of tiie  palm  tree,  but  when  he got  there  again  the  next
97






day,  he found  those  gourds  broken  on the ground.
'"This  man  found  another  means  to get some  money  with  which  
he bought  other  gourds,  and he decided  to watch  and see what  was 
breaking  his gourds;  thus  after  he had tapped  the wine,  he did  not  go 
home;  he climbed  to the top of a tree,  watching  what  would  happen  
to his gourds.  He waited  until  dusk;  still he did not see anything;  but 
still he did not go (home).,
'"When  it was  midnight,  the man  saw  something  that  was  coming  
towards  these  palm  trees,  and  he took  a very  good  look  of that dung,  
and saw that  from  its waist  downward,  the thing  was  human,  and  its 
hands  were  those  of a human  too, but the head  and all the rest  of the 
body  were  entirely  that  of antelope.
'"When  this strange  creature  came  to those  palm  trees,  he began  to 
climb  them  one by by one, taking  the wine  on top of them;  after  he 
had turned  the wine from the gourd  into the big gourd  which  he 
brought,  he would  throw  the gourd  to the ground,  and the gourd  
would  break.  Thus  he was  breaking  the gourds  one  by one  as he went  
from  one to the other As the strange  creature  was  doing  this, this 
man  shouted  greatly,  and  when  he had  shouted,  this creature  took  his 
big  gourd  of palm  wine,  and  he began  to run  along.  The  man  was  also 
running  after  him.  The  moon  was  like  the noon  daylight;  they  ran (all 
night)  until  dawn,  still the man  did not turn  back,  he kept  pursuing  
him, and  he pursued  him  until  they  got to the foot  of a mountain;  this 
man  followed  him  again,  as he finished  climbing  this  mountain  to the 
top there,  this man  foimd  himself  in foe midst  of all kinds  of animals  
in fois world;  they  were  in their  council.
'"When  he arrived  there,  foe strange  creature  fell to foe ground  into 
foe midst  of these  animals,  and foe man  stood  among  foem  wifo  fear.  
Lion,  foe king  of animals,  was  greatly  annoyed,  because  it was  a great  
grief  for foem  to see a person  who  is an ^emy  of animals  in foe forest  
(right)  in foeir  midst.  The lion  ordered  that  the man  should  be killed.  
But  after  he had  given  th^ order,  foe man  begged  for permission  from  
foe hands  of foose  animals^^S  foat they should  give him a chance  to 
say something  from his own moufo^^^  and foey acceded  to his 
request.
"'This  man stooped  to pick foe story  from  his being  destitute  (to 
the point  at which)  one rich  man  had mercy  on him,  and  how  he and 
foe rich man  had made  an arrangement  about  palm  wine,  and how  
he had  found  foe gourds  of foe palm  wine  broken  several  times  before  
he decided  to find out what  was  breaking  the gourds  of palm  wine.  
Thus,  and how  he had found  foe strange  creature,  and (how)  he had 
to follow  him  tmtil  he came  to foe anirnals  place.'
'"After  this man had finished  his speech,  foe animals  were  very  
angry  at the vicious  creature,  who  was  breaking  fois  man's  gourds  of 
palm  wine.  Fancy  that! It was an antelope.  It was foe animals  who  
were sending  him to go and buy palm  wine for foem  during  foe 
98






meeting;  and  they  always  gave  him  money,  saying  that  he should  get 
into the town,  and change  himself  into a human  being,  and buy die 
palm  wine;  but instead  of his doing  that, antelope  always  kept the 
money  in his own  pocket,  and  was  stealing  other  people's  palm  wine  
around  on the trunk  of the palm  tree,  and  he always  told  the animals  
that  he bought  it wHh  money.  Because  of this,  they  immediately  killed  
the antelope —a thief  who  was  climbing  the  palm-trees  around.  These  
animals  sympathized  with  this  man,  and  they  drought  at length  about  
what  they  could  do for him,  but they  did not know  (what  to do); so 
they gave  him die power  to hear^" voice  of die birds  and die 
animals  whenever  they were talking  to each other;  but they  
commanded  the  man  not  to tell  anybody  diat  he could  understand  the 
language  of the birds  and the aiumals  and that on the day that he 
revealed  die secret^^®  to the children  of men,  he would  die.
'"Thus  the  man  went  back  home  with  this  great  gift,  and  was  going  
on with  the rest  of his life, and  he did not reveal  the secret  to anyone.
'"When,  on a certain  day, as he sat down  in his courtyard  playing  
in die evening,  he heard  a hen telling  her chicks  to be careful  and  get 
out  of a certain  place,  because  if they  stayed  long  tiiere  spreading  the 
dirt around  there,  it would  not be long  when  they  would  find  a bag 
of gold  coins  at the bottom,  and  that  the owner  of die house  might,  by 
so doing,  see it. Thus  did die  hen  tell her chicks,  without  knowing  that 
she was  talking  into the hands  of the owner  of the house.  When  she 
had  finishedher  talk,  the chicks  left  the  place  where  they  were  playing:  
they followed  their mother;  they were  looking  for their daily  food  
along.  After  these  chickens  had left, the man  took  a hoe, and he took  
an axe, and he took the tools with which  a person  could  dig die 
ground,  and  he began  to dig the place  along.  In a short  time,  he found  
the bags  of money  which  the chicken  had talked  about,  and  he began  
to pack  them.  Since  that  day,  a good  change  came  to this man,  for he 
had become  wealthy  and his fame  had greatiy  spread  around  the 
vicinity.
"'Just  as most  of the rich people  do^^  money  always  rises and 
covers  some  people's  face like (a tide of) the Adantic  Ocean,  and it 
intoxicates  others  like palm  wine.  Money  makes  some  people  forget  
where  diey had been; instead  of praising  die Creator  widi dieir  
money,  they  always  kick  dieir  feet against  the One  who  made  them.  
God  is powerful,  yet  we still  can  find  the intelligent  people,  who  have  
money  and also  have  humility,  and still make  obeisance  before  God  
the (heavenly  King).^^®
'"When  this man became  wealthy,  he decided  to marry  woman  
upon  woman,229  but die last wife  that  he married  was  not  beautiful:  
her two fedt were  not good;  she was lame.  He married  her, simply  
becau%  she was a princess  but this woman's  envy  was greater  than  
that  of all the womai  in the world.  The  woman  had  put on envy  like 
a gown;  she  tied  jealousy  around  her  loins  like  a drawer;  she  wrapped
99






the clothe  of greed  around  Ker Kip, and she put a sha>vl  of.  covetous ­
ness  on top of her dress.^^
'"From  the time the woman  had entered  the house,  she had not 
wanted  the elder^^l  wife to have anything  to do with the husband  
again;  she did not want  the husband  to talk to her; she did not  want  
the hx^band  to play  with  her; she did not want  the husband  to do 
anything  for the woman  anymore,  and, this wife was not with the 
husband  when  the  other  one  (the  husband)  did  not  have  a doth  worth  
a single  kobo!.
'When  it was in the night,  one day, this man  and his elder  wife  
were  in the room;  the wife  was  outside;  as they  were  in the room,  the 
man  was hearing  the rats, talking  to each  other;  they  were  scolding  
the man  saying  that  he did not sleep  on time,  so that they  would  be 
free to go and eat.
'"As these  rats were  speaking  thus, the man  burst  into laugh  tor, 
but  he hardly  finished  his laughter,  when  this  vicious  wife  HartoH  into 
the house,  and she began  to scream  greatly  and shouting  that  it was 
her that  this  man  was  making  fun  of. This  man  told  her that  it was  not 
her, but she did not listen;  she said that the man  had  to tell her what  
was  making  him  laugh.  They  fought  this  fight  till day-break.  When  it 
was dawn,  the woman  went  to her father,  and told  him this matter.  
She lied against  the husband,  saying  that  she heard  her name  when  
her husband  and the elder  wife  were  talking  and also that  there  was 
no doubt  that she was the one both  of then!  were  scoffing,  for this 
reason,  she suggested  that her father  should  send  for file husband^  
and  he should  ask  him  for her about  the matter  they  were  discussing,  
and also,  that  if the man  could  not tell what  was  fusing  hisjaughter,  
it must  be assumed  that  he had  underrated  the king.  For  that,  the king  
must  then  kill him.
"'Before  a bird picked  up a guinea-com^^^  the king  sent for this 
man.  When  he came  and told  the king  that  he could  not  tell what  was 
causing  his laughter,  the king  got angry,  and  he told  the man  that  he 
was going  to kill him;  the man  agreed  to the king's  (proposa^.  They  
ordered  him  to go and  clear  his house,  and  they  named  the day  of his 
execution.  He too went home,  and he padded  all his belongings  
together,  and  he gave  them  to his first  wife,  who  was  his elder  wife  to 
that  woman  who  was  the  daughter  of the  king —a traitor;  he got  ready  
to die. On the day of his death,  all the citizens  gathered  together  
without  a single  person  missing.  According  to the custom  of file town,  
they  gave  him  a chance  to speak  to the town's  people  before  he died.
'"When  thi^ man  began  to speak,  fear gripped  the town's  people  
very  firmly.  He spoke  about  how  he was once  a poor  man,  and that 
his poverty  was so much  that he never  had more  than one under-  
wear^^  in the world,  and that his wife did not have  more  than  one 
drawer,  and that  the money  he used  to have  on hand  at a time  never  
exceeded  three  pence,^^  and  he never  slept  at night,  because  of much  
100






thinking  and his hearP^  was never  at rest, and his food  was never  
good,  and his body  was as dried  as a stick.
'"And  how  it was  his  neighbour  alone,  who  had  mercy  on him,  and 
he began  to tap palm  wine,  and how an antelope  was breaking  his 
gourds,  and he began  to pursue  it imtil they got before  a host of 
animals.  He also told how  he presented  his case before  the animals,  
and how  they  gave  him the power  to hear  die voices  of the animals  
and tike birds,  and  how  they  had  warned  him  that,  on the day  that  he 
told die secret  to another  person,  he was going  to die^ He also spoke  
about  the conversation  of the rats,  which  he heard,  which  made  him 
laugh,  which  also  made  his wife  to say that  he was  scolding  her.
"'Immediately  the man  finished  his speech,  he fell down  and  died.
'"You,  my friend,  after  he had died, they took that woman  and 
hanged  her on die tree.
"This  is what  the world  is like,  you,  my  friend:  some  people  would  
marry  death  into the house  with  money,^^  and would  say that  they  
have married  women;  some people  would  marry  debt, and they-  
would  say  that  they  have  married  wives.  Some  people  would,  because  
of greed,  lose the love  of an important  wife.  A wife's  matter  is not a 
jovial  matter,  for whatever  pertains  to one's  home  is no more  a trivial  
matter.  If a person  wants  to have  a wife,  it behoves  die fellow  to think  
very deeply,  and he should  entreat  God to guide  him, because  a 
mother  is different  from  a wife,  and a father  is different  from  one's  
woman.  A woman  is a snail  shell,  afid  a husband  is die  snail:  wherever  
the snails  goes, it goes with-die  shell.237  Once  marriage  is started,  
trouble  has started;  as wives  multiply,  the love would  continue  to 
dwindle,  and a host of men are living  with (their  bitter)  enemies,  
whom  they call women.  Act according  to your capacity,  you, my 
friend;238  that your  wife loves  you before  she enters  your
house.  It is true  diat  you  are  the one  who  should  first  ask  her to many  
you  before  she  responds  to you,  but  be sure  that  she  herself  loves  you.  
And you should  not also behave  like the hypocritical  man about  
whom  the women  pray  that  God  should  not  let them  come  dieir  way.
"By die same  token,  there are many  envious  people  in this our 
world,  and  there  is no way  in which  they  cannot  show  their  envy.  The 
one who is unhappy  about  other  people's  progress  is an envious  
person.  If a person  is in the position  of being  a head^^  an envious  
person  always  looks  for every  means  to show  tiiat  that  person  is not 
fit for the post,  arid he would  forget  that  he whom  God  has exalted,  
nobody  can  bring  him  down  forever.
"Thus  did Baba-Onirungbon  speak  his words,  and when  he 
finished  those  words,  I answered,  and I said,  'My dear  friend,  is that 
the end of your  speech?  Go on with  it, I am enjoying  it; your  words  
are entering  my ears, I am enjoying  your wonis,  my friend,  
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  die man.
"After  tjiis, Baba-Onirungbon  got up from  where  he sat, and he
101






pointed  to a tree that  had  very  beautiful  flowers,  he said,  'Look  at that 
tree over there,  the tree whose  leaves  are deeply  green  over there.  
Look  at its flowers  again;  see how  beautiful  they  are also.  After  that,  
look at the right  hand  side near the tree, you will see another  tr^ 
which  is a little  smaller;  you will see that  bofli  of them  resemble  each  
other. Observe  both of them very well, because  I want to say 
something  to you about  them.
"^ter  he had  thus  spoken,  I also  answered;  I said,  Ihave  seen  fliem,  
they  resemble  each  other;  they are like twins  among  all the trees  in 
that  vicinity,  therefore  go on with  your  talk.
"After  I had said this, die man continued  his talking,  he said,  
Olowo-aiye,  those  two trees  that you have  seen  were  human  beings  
before.  The  older  of the two was a boy, the second  one  was  a girl.  The 
two of them  loved  each  other  very  much,  and they  wanted  to marry  
each other,  so that they would  become  husband  and wife,  but the 
parents  of both of them did not want them to many  each  other,  
because  there  was  no agreement  among  those  parents.  Still  this  young  
boy and the young  girl were  like the tongue  and the mouth  to each  
other,  and they  used  to talk to each  other  lhrough.a  hole  on the wall.  
If the girl put  her  ear  in the hole  on the wall  on one  side,  the boy  would  
talk to her from  the other  side.  If the boy put his ear in the mouth  of 
the hole in his room,  the ^rl would  talk to him from  over  {here.  My 
friend,  it is I who  have  told  you; there  is no way that two lovers  can 
exist  without  having  a difficulty  between  them.  Love  does  not walk  
without  stumbling  a little, but a complete  love always  turns a 
mountain  to a plain  ground;  he always  walks  carelessly  in the middle  
of thorns,  and  he wiU run  fast  in the midst  of pot-holes  and  hillocks.
' 'Thus  those  two  decided  to run  away  from  home  and  go to another  
town,  so that they could  live togeflier  according  to the love of tiieir  
heart;2 ‘*0 but  man  proposes,  but  God  disposes:  man  knows  today  God  
knows  tomorrow;  He knows  day after  tomorrow,  and He knows  die 
uncountable  thousands  of years  ahead  of us.
"The  two  children  decided  to leave  home  atni^t  in flie  moonli^t,  
and they  promised  to meet  each  other  by one river  bank;  who ever  
first  got there  would  wait  for the other,  and when  bodi  of them  met 
there,  they  would  run  away,  so fliat  they  would  thereby  live  togedier,  
and  begin  to eat pounded-yam  with  love,  and eat oka  with  love,  and 
eataAasu^^l  with  love.
" In the evening  of the appointed  day, it was die female  fliat  first 
got to this bank  of flie river,  waiting  for her lover.  But  it was  not  long  
when  she had thus  been  waiting,  when  die saw a lion coming,  and 
when  she saw  it, she ran away  to hide  herself  in the hole  of a rock,  but 
one  of her clothes  fell on die ground,  as die was  running  away.  V^en  
this lion got to where  the clothe  was,  it sniffed  it, and turned  it with  
its moudi,  and  the  blood  awfully  stained  flie  clothe.  After  this,  the lion 
drank  water,  and  went  into  its hole.  But this girl did  not know  when
102
■ nt ■><■...--.-— -------- ----






the lion left: she kept  sitting  there  (in the hole).
"'Soon  after  this, the boy came  and  he did not see his female  lover,  
instead  of this, he found  his lover's  clothe  on the ground,  awfully  
stained  with  blood.  When  he saw this,  he thought  that  his lover  had 
died,  he burst  into bitter  weeping,  he said;
"'What  a pity! What  a pity! What  a pity! My lover  has gone!  What  
is the world  to me without  my lover?  My lover  has fallen  into the 
hands  of a,vicious  beast;  a lion has torn  her into pieces.  Who  will be 
like my lover  intheworld!  Who  is as beautiful  as the child  among  the 
children  of men!  Who  can do what  she did for me! Ha! My lover,  my 
lover,  my dearest  lover.  In-the  day of sorrow,  you  gave  me joy; on the 
day of weeping,  you gave rhe laughter;  on the day of anger,  you 
comforted  me; on the day of fighting,  you gave me patience;  on the 
day of lowering  down,  you lifted  me up. When  the children  of the 
world  rejected  me, you did not reject  me; v'hen'  they were scolding  
me, you did  not scold  me, when  they  were  conspiring  against  me, you 
did not conspire  against  me; it was  you that  I made  as my pride  bef<^  
friends;  it was you that 1 made  as a provocation^'*^  before  those  who 
knew  me; it was you about  whom  I was boasting  in the midst  of all 
well-known  people.  As you  dealt  widi  me in my presence,  so you did 
behind  my back also. Wherever  you saw my people  you honoured  
them;  whenever  there  were  visitors,  you were  always  takine  care of 
them  with  joy. I only  gave  you money  whenever  I had any.^ I gave  
you  gift only  whenever  it was  within  my ability  to give  you  a gift,  ^d 
you haA never  put my matter  down,  scolding  me behind  my back  io 
the midst  of your  playmates;  I always  found  you wherever  I left you,  
you  had  not married  me and  then  begun  to whisper  to another  person  
in the secret  afterwards,  and  I have  never  caught  you in any  hypocrisy  
since  the day we have  been  dating  each  other. You  have  respected  
me the way you should  respect  me; you have  played  with me at the 
right time of playing;  you sympathized  with me at the time of 
sympathizing;  thus you have never  told me, even one day, what  1 
could  do (for  you).  What  remains  for me after  all these?  What  remains  
for me then?  For you to go and me to remain  in the world  or what?  
Not me! A tortoise  never  goes  with  his shell  left behind;  wherever  the 
snail  goes it goes  with  its shell  .2'*^
"'Thus  did flie young  man  say,  and  after  he had  finished  his speech,  
he pulled  out a cutlass,  andhe  cuthimself  in the stomach,  to the extent  
that  his guts spilled  out — death  had come.
"'As this boy kept silenP'*^  his lover  came out from the hole in 
which  she was  hiding,  no person  could  tell how  great  the sorrow  was,  
when  she saw the corpse  of her lover.  On the same  spot,  she  fell down,  
and she was downhearted  to the extent  that she died for nothing.
"The story  of their  death  spread  to all parts  of the world  at that 
time,  and God the (heavenly)  King  turned  both  of them  to those  two 
trees  which  you  are looking  at there  — the trees  whose  leaves  are cool
103






as bananas  by the bank  of the river,  and the flowers  on their  tops  were  
bringing  out sweet  smell.  God has put two creatures  from h^ven  
ujider  those  trees,  so that they would  be watching  the place  sothat  
nothing  would  come  to harm  tiieir  bodies.
'"Behold,  my friend,  when  love is hot, it is like the sea water  that 
rises up and covers  the sand. Love  always  covers  the faces  of those  
who love each  other.  Love  is like palm  wine  from  the palm  tree with  
which  a man has been  drunk  which  begins  to intoxicate  him, which  
h^ turned  him into a mad man, which  makes  him unconscious  of 
what  he is doing.  Many  women  always  turn  deaf  ears  to their  relatives  
when  love boils  over,  and-spills  oVer  their  faces  like hot  water  which  
boils  over  and  covers  the yam  flour  .247 It behoves  the  young  boys  and 
young  girls  to open  their  eyes  very  well,  and  beg God  the (heavenly)  
King to direct  diem to the (right)  way before  they begin  to love 
someone/*"  Faces  and clothing  are the things  the young  children  of 
today  focus  upon  for which  they love  people:  this is a complete  act of 
sapidity.  A child  who does  not think  deeply  befpre  he lets love ride 
him  like a horse,  when  love had pushed  him in die pit,  .his arms  and 
feet would  fill up the pit to th^ brim.
''Thus  did Baba-Onirungbon  teach  me an important  wisdom  after  
he had completed  his second  story.  As I was looking  at him when  he 
kept  silent,  I asked  him;  I said,  'My  dear  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  
I thank  you very much,  I thank  you, and I thank  yoti again,  for die 
more  a person  accumulates  days  over  his head,  the more  wisdom  in 
his head  would  continue  to increase .249.  Aren't  you going  to ask why  
I said that?  I have  been  surprised  since  yod  have  been  talking  today,  
as I heard  the big words  which  were  in your  mouth,  and I was  noting  
the important  words  which  were  in your throat.  When  I thought  a 
little  while  about  these  words,  I almost  wept  for  children,  because^ey  
are  not  afraid  of the elders  anymore:  they  are wise  in their  own  eyes.^  
They  are dying  like fire, and they are falling  sick unawares;  still they  
would  not think  and take  note  of the words  of those  of you who  are 
elders,  so that  diey  would  increase  (dieir)  wisdom,  so that  they  would  
increase  (their)  knowledge,  so that they  would  recognise  the stump  
which  caught  the feet  of the ones  before  them,  so that they  too would  
not fall into a bottomless  pit. Thus  it is a lie: a partridge  that  compares  
Itself  with  a hen is playing  with  death;  a child  that compares  himself  
with adults  is pulling  trouble's  leg (toward  himself), 25'1 for a child's  
stomach  is shallow,  and the stomach  of an adult  is deeper  than  the sea 
water  .2'52
Therefore,  my great  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  I thank  you very  
very  much.  Go on with  your  talk;  it is very  delightful  to me; I am not 
tired  of it.
After  I had said this, he looked  at me for a while;  he shook  his 
head up and down,  and he said, ^You, young  child,  you are very  
wise.'253  After  he had said  this,  he continued  his words  again;  he said.
104






'"OlOwo-aiye,  when  1 think  for a while  sometimes,  when  I think  
about  the lack of contentment  of the children  of the world,  it always  
seems  as if one important  person  has  cUrsed  the children  of the world.  
The children  of men  will  never  say, 'We  have  gone  far enough  where  
we are;' they would  say just a little bit more,  until the day of their  
dead).  But when  I think  about  it, on the other  hand,  1 can see, again,  
that if there  were  no such things,  the world  would  not have  been  as 
sweet  as this. Still, things  call for moderation.^^^  Let us take the 
Christians  for example:  a Christian  who  was  in the position  of a reader  
in the church,  and  he-left  this post  to. become  a clergyman,  and (from  
there},  he became  a bisKSp,  and.yet  he was not contented;  does  that 
person  want  to become  God?  Onfor  a Moslem  to become  an aJhajP^^  
and (from  there),  to become  a junior  Imam,^^* ’ and for him to get out 
of that, and become  the head  of die Imams,  and he still continues  to 
tip-toe;  does  that person  want  to become  the AnabS?'^'^  The children  
of die world  do not always  have  contentment  at all — what  a shame!  
Observe  many  6f the rich people  — not all of them  — but when  many  
of them  become  rich,  they  find  it difficult  to eat with  their  moudi,  and 
they v'ould  begin  to behave  likd those  who have  been  cursed;  diey 
would  drink?  ^ari in the afternoon;  they would  drink  gah in the 
midnight,  until  their  cheeks  would  be flat, and  all their  bodies  would  
be dried  completely,,like  the meat  that my wife cooked  in the soup  
last night,  whose  bones  were  sounding  crunchy  in my mouth.  Truly,  
it is good  for pwple  to struggle  to do a big thing  and for one to look 
for progress  for-one's  self, because  he who stands  on one spot  like a 
stagnant  .water/  is not among  the living;  diat fellow  is a dead one 
among  them.  But he who stretches  his hand  to that which  his hand  
cari never  reach  forever  — it is just a tail that such  a person.needs  in 
order  to be a complete  monkey  so that  he would  be hopping  from  one 
tree to the other.  A Yoruba  son, who is not related  to the family  of a 
king,  in whose  family  no one has ever worn  a crown,  and to whom  
no  tody  had told a story  of his family  in relationship  to Odudua,  and 
who leaves  his home  town  to go and run for a royal  position  in the 
town  on die other  side, saying  that he wants  to be a king,  that  one is 
not  different  from  a baboon,  except  that  his  body  is smoother  than  that 
of a baboon.
"In the Olden  days,  when  the world  was not like this, when  the 
children  of men  knew  die  value  of God^^s  more  than  now,  God  always  
sent a messenger  from ‘heaven  to come and visit the world;  die 
messenger  used  to come  every  seven  years;  die messenger  was  one of 
the creatures  in heaven;  the people  in the world  used  to call him the 
Representative  of God.  At whichever  tiipe  he came,  it used  to be a big 
time ih the world;  song  used  to bump  into song;  drumming  used  to 
bump  into drumming;  dance  used to bump  into dance  and people  
Used  to have  an important  party  as a token  of respect  for the one  who  
made  them.  At the time about  which  we are talking,  Satan  had not
105






had.  a root  in the world;  he used  to be a special  creature  in heaven.  But 
when  Satan  took sacrifice  beyond  the crossroads,  and turned  a deaf  
ear to the word  of God,  the creatures  in heaven  drove  him  outside.^S^  
This  was the time  that  Satan  had a chance  to destroy  the lives  of men  
— when  man  began  to turn  his back  against  God  the (heavenly)  King.  
Satan  was  more  vicious  than  the rest  of the creatures,  and  since  he had 
invaded  the hearts  of those  people,  they began  to enter  into sin like 
someone  entering  a room.  They  were  hissing  against  God,  and they  
were  saying  that  the position  in which  He put them  was  not enough,  
and they  were  saying  unfit  words  to their  Creator.
'"After  a while,  when  the Representative  of God  came  to visit  them,  
they  did  not  honour  him  as (they  did)  before,  and when  he asked  them  
the reason,  they told  him that  the position  in which  God  placed  them  
was  not  enough,  and that  they  were  not satisfied  with  their  condition.
'"God  loves  man: He always  ti-^ats  man like his child.  When  the 
creature  got (back)  to heaven  and delivered  the message  that the 
children  of the world  were  not satisfied,  God  sent  him back  to go and 
enquire  what  each of them  wanted,  so that he would  do it for them.  
When  the Representative  of God  got back  to the world,  he rang  a bell 
round  the outside  saying  that  everybody  should  come  to meet  him  so 
that he would  ask his question,  so that  he would  go and tell toe One 
who  sent  him.  They  delayed  him for three  complete  years.  They  were  
sending  him with  messages  to heaven.  Their  questions  were  diverse,  
and they were  more  than  one could  count;  yet, I shall tell you a few 
of their  questions.
'"One  of toe men  who  came  before  the Representative  of God  asked  
his questions  thus and  he said)  "You  messenger  of toe Creator  of toe 
earto,  you messenger  of the Creator  of heaven,  this is my heart's  
desire:  I am tired  of being  in toe position  of the poor,  I am  not  the only  
one in toe world;  why is it that  my (own  case)  becomes  so difficult?  
Counting  toe days  of want  of something  to eat, toe days  of want  of 
sometoing  to drink,  toe days  of want  of something  to cover  the body;  
my own (destitution)  is (simply)  too much;  please  help me tell God  
the (heavenly)  King,  to have  mercy,  and  put me in a better  condition  
than  tills.'
'The  second  one  who  also  came  to toe Representative  of God  began  
his own  speech;  he said, 'You  messenger  of toe Creator  of toe earto,  
you  messenger  of toe Creator  of heaven,  tell God  the (heavenly)  King  
for me that  he should  examine  my matter;  toe one who  is my boss  at 
work  is more  vicious  toan  a poisonous  snake;  he has wickedness  (in 
him)  as if he were  not  himself  a human  being;  he always  sends  me on 
an errand  in toe middle  of toe night;  he always  sends  me on an errand  
in toe secret;  he always  sends  me on an errand  in toe open;  he had 
never  commended  me for my work,  not even for one day; and he 
always  frowns  his face from the morning  right to the evening.  
Therefore,  I beg you, help me tell God the (heavenly)  King,  that He 
106






should  put me under  another  person,  who  would  take  care  of me."  
'"Someone  came  again  to the Representative  of God,  and  when  he 
started  talking,  he said, 'You  messenger  of the Creator  of the earth,  
you messenger  of the Creator  of heaven,  help me to tell  God  that  it is 
my wife  who  has not given  me any single  satisfaction;  it was  the wife  
who  first  drew  my  face  to herself;^^  I never  had  the  intention  to many  
her  at first.  But  what  about  when  the time  the strong-headed  one  came  
home?  She does  not  even  know  how  to be fashionable  in anyway;  she 
is not current  with today's  world;  her clothes  are not good  enou^;  
her  steps  are  not  healthy;  her  foods  do not go very  well  in the throat?* ’^ 
She cannot  talk very much  through  her mouth;  the whole  house  is 
usually  deadly  silent.  The  woman  is sickly:  I go from  the house  of one 
priest^^2  to other,  moreover  her people  are very  poor;  they  do not 
have  anything.  My friend  who  lives  close  to my house  never  had  half 
a penny  before:  it was his wife's  father  that made  him to become  a 
person^^  he spent  a big amount  of money  for  his surety  with  a white  
man,  and  when  I saw both  husband  and  wife  not long  ago, they  both  
sat and leaned  their  backs  in a saloon  car, moving  along  like royalty.  
Therefore,  I beg you, you important  messenger,  who is the 
Representative  of God,  tell God (toe heavenly)  King  for me, that He 
should  take  this  wife  and  give  her  to some  one  else,  and  toat  He should  
find  a wife  who  would  be better  for me."
"One  educated  person  came  to toe Representative  of God;  this  man  
whom  we are talking  about  was a teacher.  When  he got to toe 
Representative  of God  arid began  to speak,  he said, 'You  messenger  
of toe Creator  of toe earth,  you  messenger  of toe Creator  of toe  heaven,  
tell God  the (heavenly)  King  for me that  I am not contented  with  tois 
work  that  I am doing  at all, because  my money  is not enough,^^  toe 
children  do not give  me a rest  of mind,  and  J have  to write  everyday,  
and my head  is always  very  hot indeed.  Those  wito  whom  I starts  
working  at toe same  time  are now  fat; toe backof  their  necks  are now  
big, and their  mere  knees  are even  fatter  than  my waist.  Thus,  here  I 
am, I am as slender  as a snake,  and I am not  fat. I'm  just  like  an earth ­
worm  and I am  just  staggering  around.  Therefore,  I beg  you,  tell God  
toe (heavenly)  King  for me, toat He should  look for another  job for 
me.'
"Immediately  tois man finished  speaking  toat which  was in his 
mouto,  anotoer  man  dropped  in front  and  fell down  before  the  Repre ­
sentative  of God;  he said,  "You  messenger  of the Creator  of earth,  you 
messenger  of the Creator  of heaven,  tell  God  the (heavenly)  King  for 
me that I am not contented  at all wito  the child  He has pven  to me; 
let Him change  him for me. The child  toat I have  now is as hard  as 
stone:  he always  climbs  a tree to its apex;  he always  hops  from  one 
hillock  to toe  other;  he always  swims  in a deep  river;  he always  chases  
goats  around  the house;  he always  stones  sheep  around  toe road;  he 
always  chases  people's  children  around  toe outside.  His head  is as
107






hard  as stone.  He does  not know  book^^  at alt except  that  he draws  
pictures  around.  He had lost the book  that I bought  for him  recently;  
the shirt that I bought  for him the other day he has tom; he is a 
chairman  (at the eating  of) rice, the governor  of a king  (at the 
eating  of poimded  yam;  and  important  person)  at the consumption  of 
soup;  he is a friend  to a food-owner,  an enemy  to the person  who  
works;  the bo/  s matter  is much  more  than  something  to be counted;  
therefore,  you faiiy  from  heaven,  please  help me find where  I shall  
place  this matter;^"^  j vyant  a soft  person;  I do not  want  a disobedi^t  
child."
' "After  this,  one man  came  before  the Representative  of God  again,  
it was one clerk.  When  he came,  he spoke  with  enthusiasm;  he was 
talking  with his head;  he was talking  with his neck;  he said, 'Yop  
messenger  of the Creator  of earth,  you messenger  of foe Creator  of 
heaven,  help  me tell God  that  He should  help  me to change  foe hearts  
of the authorities  at my working  place, so foat they will stop,  
transferring  me-every,  year,  so foat I would  stop going  from  city to 
city, from  village  to village  — going  around  in hectic  conditions  — 
what  they  are  doing  to me  is not  good.  The  decorating  materials  which  
I had when  I first started  working  have all been spoilt-.,  they were  
getting  spoilton  foe  way  as Ikept  tyingmy  luggage  around.  My  wife's  
three  pots  have  broken;  one hundred  and fifty spoons  were  lost; foe 
children  could  not find any mat to sleep on anymore;  house  
decorating  materials  were  dwindling  everyday;  we cannoteven  count  
the little  filings  which  we di4  not  know  how  they  got  away;  and at- fop 
time we started  to enjoy our friends,  we are parted  from them.  
Therefore,  I appeal  to you,  help  me tell God  foe (heavenly)  King,  that 
He should  look  for another  boss  for  me, or else He should  change ’ foe 
hearts  of these  my bosses,  so that foey  would  consider  my,  wife,  and 
have  mercy  on my children,  and think  about  foe known  feces,  and 
stop  transferring  me around."
"Hie one that I am going  to talk about  is foe man  who asked  a 
question  which  greatly  amazed  everybody.  When  foe man started  
talking  he said,  'You  messenger  of foe Creator  of earth,  you  messenger  
of foe Creator  of heaven,  what  I want  to ask is difficult,  but I plead  
with  you to do it for me.  Tell  Cod  foe (heavenly)  King  for me foat  foe 
town  in which  He made  me to be bom  is not pleasing  to me; I want  
the children  of the world  to call me a son of another  town;  I do not 
want  anybody  to identify  me with  foe town.  Since  I was  bom  there,  I 
have  not been  hemfoy  at all. I had seven  children  and two of foem  
have  died;  I am certain  that  it was foe witches  who  killed  foe two of 
foem.  The work  of farming  which  I had did not benefit  me, because  
foe soil is not good: foe yams  did not grow;  foe banana  did not 
produce  young  ones,-^^  foe  melon  did  not  grow;  I never  got  more  than  
two  baskets  of beans^^^  in a year.  After  fiiis,  I borrowed,  ten ponndg^^O 
from  my friend,  and I began  to trade;  I had  profit  with  which  I paid  
108






off the money;  I did the same  thing,  and built  a nouse;  after this, I 
bought  an automobile  and  I was  beginning  to e^oy  my life a little,  but 
the people  of the town  are not good;  they stuck  their eyes into my 
body;27i  tPmg  after  a while,  one of my automobiles  broke  down;  the 
second  one ran into a tree, and it became  completely  ruin^;  it.was  
God  who  saved  me —no one  died  there —yet I spent  (a lot) of money  
on the matter  before  I got out (of it). I cannot  tell the number  of my 
older  siblings,  young  siblings,  relatives,  friends,  and  known  faces  who  
are dying  every  year.  Am 1 the only  one in the world?.  The worst  of 
all things  is that  die town  itself  is too small;  nobody  even  knows  much  
about  somewhere  else, and I am always  ashamed  whenever  people  
ask me about  my hometown  while I am long way from there.  
Therefore,  I beg  you  wholeheartedly,  tell God  the (heavenly)  King  for 
me, to give  me another  town,  and that  He^^^  should  announce  to the 
children  of die world  that this  vicious  town  is not mine  anymore,  and 
that it was  in another  place  that  I was bom.'
'"Thus  all these  people  began  to ask what  they wanted;  after a 
while,  the Representative  of G<xl  told  them  that  everybody  should  ask 
about  his own  illness;  kut  he told  them  that  whoever  wanted  to leave  
his illness  must ask for another,  qne in its place, one which  was 
comparable  to the one he had left, in terms  of the evil that die illness  
was doing.
"'Wheh  d^e people  began  to ask (questions)  about  illness,  they 
surrounded  the Representative  of God; diey covered  him up as the 
host  of ants  would  cover  a crumb  of food;  they  were  talking  as if the 
palm  birds  were  crying  on the palm  tree;  they  were  walking  here  and 
there like the swallows  flying  around  in the backyard;  they were  
complaining  as if die One who  created  then!  was  not as wise  as they  
were.273  ' '
"'Some  left headache,  and picked  up stomach  ache; another  left 
backache;  he asked  (or footache;  some blind man was asking  for 
deafness;  the one.  with gumea-worm  was asking  for arthritis;  some  
leper  was  asking  for epilepsy.  The  day  was  a great  day  for the children  
of the world ;— they  were  leaking  the secret  which  God  kept  for them  
(confidentially) .
"'After  this, most of the people  began  to murmur  about  their  
bodies'  beauty Women  were  greater  in number  tiiere  at this time;\  
people's  ears  heard  something!  One person  Would  say that  her head  
was too big and that she wanted  it to be smaller;  another  would  say 
her ears  were  bigger  than  she  wanted,  and  that  die did  not  want  those  
types  of ears anymore;  another  person  would  say that  her legs  were  
thinner  than they should  be, and that she wanted  them  to be a little  
bit bigger.  Another  person  was  complaining  about  her hair  not  being  
plenty  enough;  another  one would  say that the hair  of her head  was 
not  black  enough  as it should  be, and  another  person  was  murmuring  
that the hair which  was plenty  enough  before  was dwindling.  Other
109






praple  were begging  for eyes, because  the eyes they had were  not 
satisfying  to them;  (still)  another  person  would  say that  her eyes  were  
like cat s eyes;  another  one said  her eyes  were  like dog's  eyes,-another  
person  compared  her eyes to .-those  of a cow; thus they were  
complaining  about  themselves.  Others  did  not  even  talk  about  the  face 
at all mstead,  .they  were  talking  about  the mouth;  they  were  saying  
that  their  mouths  were  very  wide;  their  mouths  were  round,  and that 
their teeth wwe red. Thus the children  of the world  were talking,  
short  legs,  and  long  legs,  small  handj  
and  big  hands,  and thus  did the Representative  of God  listen  and  was 
neanng  their  complaints.
-i^ter  the children  of the world  had  finished  the words  from  their'  
mouths,  the creature  stood  up, and  he told them  to go home,  and  that 
in the morning  of the second  day, everybody  would  see that  he Had 
received  all that  he had  asked  for. Before  all of them  dispersed,  he told 
them  also that at the fourteenth  year,  after  that, that  he would  come  
back  again  to visit  them  in the world,  so he would  come  and  hear  hpW  
mey  were  enjoying  all the new  things  which  they  asked  for. After'he  
had said thus,  tire children  of the world  went  into die world,  and  he 
also went  into  heaven.
"Truly,  what  this creature  said  happened;  the second  day  all things  
haPP^Jhe  way  he said;  everybody  found  himself  in the condition  
that  he had  asked  for.
"But  what  was  greatly  surprising  was  that  the week  had  not  ended  
when  the children  of the world  returned  to their  complaining-again,  
^ey  wanted  to come  back  to their  former  positions  again,  and  bdbre  
three  years that, noise  had fiUed the whole  world.  Before  six 
^ars, they had be^  to appease  and offer sacrifice  to God the 
(heavenly)  King  so that  He would  let the Representative  of God  come  
bacl<  quickly  to put  them  back  into  the former  positions  in which  they  
were  before,  '^ey  tried  to change  God from  His decision,  but it was 
impossible.  They sacrificed  goat; they sacrificed  sheep;  they  
slaughtered  a raw  on the crossroads;  they  slaughtered  a rooster;  thev  
^aughtered  a hfn,  and they  sacrificed  a whole  hiiman  being;  But  yet 
God did not.send  the creature  until  when  the fourteen  years  wfere  over.
"When  foe Representative  of God  came,  andall  foe children  of foe 
/ gathered  together  again,  their rariditions  were no more  
satisfactory  to them  again;  a host  of them  wanted  to go back  to their  
posihons  in which  they  hadbeenbefore.  The  words  from  foejr  mouths  
ternhed  people  very  much,  and  I want  to tell a few  of foe changes  that 
had come  upon  them.  °
another  child,  who  said  that  his child  was  not 
snmrt, ■ had had anofoer  who was smart,  but this new child  had 
^tered  into foe prison  before  foe Representative  of God came,  
because  he who  is smart  and  had  no character  is worse  foan  foe  person  
110






who  has character,  but who  is not smart.  The  educated  ones  who  have  
lost their  conduct,  are the poisonous  snakes  in the world,  biting  the 
innocent  ones  around  at the outside,  and  their  eyes  have  been  blinded;  
but  they  are  not  aware  of it; they  are in the position  of the blind  leading  
the sighted  people.  The man who said that his child  was not smart  
when  the Representative  of God  came  the first  time,  saw that  the child  
whom  he had  rejected  on that  day,  had  become  an important  person.  
He was simply  cutting  people's  hair'before;  but he took care of tire 
job; and he took care of the money.  After  a while,  he began  to trade  
with  the money/and  the fading  went  on very  well,  to the extent  that 
by the time the Representative  of God came back, four hundred  
educated  people  were  secretaries  under  this child,  and  he was  paying  
them  with  his own  money;  thus  he became  the boss  of those  educated  
people,  and they were  folding  their  hands  on their  back  before  they 
talked  to him;  they  were  always  running  (towards  him)  whenever  he 
called  them,  and  they  were  always  respecting  him  whenever  he went  
to them.
"/One  man  who  said  he wanted  to be rich had  been  rich  before  the 
Representative  of God came,  but the creature  from  heaven  met him 
in sickness;  when  he became  rich he did not know^^^  the elders  
anymore;  he began  to be saucy  to all the people  around.  At long  last, 
a sickness  struck  him,  and there  was  no doctor  near-by,  find  the elders  
who  knew  the medicine  which  would  help him  did not (care)  to help 
him,  because  he had been  saucy  to them.  In the second  place,  before  
this sickness  happened,  the,robbers  had attempted  to kill him three  
times,  but their  h^ds  did not gethold  of him.  At the third  time,  they 
stabbed  him,  but their  hands  did not get him  very  well,  but still, they 
cut off his right  thumb,  and as he was running  away,  he plunged  into 
a pit, and  his right  foot  broke  into pieces.  After  all, his being  rich  was 
a testing,  and the man did not do well in the test. After  he became  
w^lthy,  he married  a host of women.  He never examined  their  
character  before  he began  to marry  them;  he was looking  at physical  
beauty  and the family  size,  as he began  to marry  them.  But  before  the 
Representative  of God came,  this man's  mind  was not at rest in the 
house:  his house  was filled with noise,  fighting,  sadness,  and the 
people  in the house  did not befriend  one another;  they were great  
enemies  to one another.
"'One  of those  who complained  to the Representative  of God this 
second  time was one who first said that his boss' conduct  was too 
tough;  he had  gone  to another  boss  who was colder  than  water  from  
the water-cooler,  but other  people  began  to cheat  him,  and the insult  
which  they did not pass  on him when  he was under  the tough  boss  
they  were  passing  on him  (now)  while  he was  luider  the soft boss;  no 
single  progress  (of any sort).
'"The  one  who  said  that  his wife  was  the daughter  of a peasant  had 
gone  to marry  a daughter  of a wealthy  man,  but  before  the man  came
111






before  the Representative  of God, he was not rnore  than a (slender)  
whip;  because  his mind  was not at rest. The wife showed  him some ­
thing! She was not obedient;  she did not care (for anything  or 
anybody);  she,  was always  complaining  everyday;  she always  went  
out  of the  house  as she  liked,  and  she  always  came  whenever  she  liked,  
and she was die one who was giving  orders  to the husband.
'"He who said that he did not like the teaching  job anymore,  and 
that  he wanted  to be a secretary  truly  found  himself  at the secretarial  
job, but when  he first  started  working,  the building  in which  he was 
working  was filled with a lot of people;  there were one thousand  
secretaries,  and  he was  the least  of them  all; his work  did  not  progress  
veiy well,  because  he did not possess  the talent  for the job which  he 
was yearning  for; neither  did he walk  with  the wise  ones  on the job; 
he was acting  like the children  of the rich people  (without  any money  
in his hand);  those  did not depend  upon  their  salaries  alone,  for they  
were still getting  money  from their fathers;  thus the fact that there  
were  different  kinds  of people  on the  job became  like a trial  to the  man,  
and  before  the Representative  of God  arrived,  he had gone  into  debt.
"'The man who asked  at first that his master  should  stop  
- transferring  him  from  one town  to another  with  haste,  had  not left the 
town  in which  he had  been  before  the representative  of God  came  for 
the first  time.  For die whole  fourteen  years  in which  the creature  was 
in heaven,  they did not change  his position.  The town  was not in an 
open place;  it was in a comer,  and nobody  heard  about  die man  
anymore.  He sat there,  and  he was  like  a king  among  the people;  pride  
penetrated  into  his heart,  and  he began  to think  that  diere  was  nobody  
like him.  The man's  work  never  showed  outside  so much.  Whenever  
his colleagues  were  -promoted,  he was not, because  each time die 
heads  went there to visit the man, he was always  priding  himself  
before  them;  because  he did not know  that  his work>vas-not  as good  
as those  of other  places;  he sat down  in one town;  he never  came  out 
in the plain;  he never  knew  that he who made  a room  his place  of 
abode  would  only  be limited  to the room's  wisdom.  Where  this man  
thought  the world  was, the world  had left that place.  When  the 
Representative  of God came,  and the man came  out in the midst  of 
the people  who  had  retrogressed  completely,  he began  to be ashamed;  
his walking  was unlike  that of people;  he was like an animal  who  
(simply)  putxan  the skin  of a person  over  his body.
'"It was the same  thing  with  one who  said that  his own  town  was-  
not good,,  and that he wanted  to become  a native  of another  town.  
Truly,  he'became  a native  of another  town;  but within  three  years,  all 
of his three children  died, for the atmosphere  of die town  was Hof 
congenial  to his body.277  pjjg wife died,  and the people  of the town  
did not love him;  they were  conspiring  against  him everyd^.  Food  
was  as expensive  as (human)  eyes;  one  yam  was  one  pound;^^^  tin^^^  
of (red)  oil was six pounds;  a bushel  of yam-flour  was two pounds.  
112






and a rooster  was seven  pounds.  Thus this man's life was very  
miserable  fo the extent  that  he was tired  of life, and heaven  began  to 
appeal  to him;  he wanted  to go there.  ~ .
"'Before  the arrival  of the Representative-of  God,  most  of the sick 
ones had died; their bodies  were not strong'  erigugh  to carry the 
sickness  which  they  had asked  for when  he first cam'e.-^^
"'Those  who  asked  for the beauty  of the body  regretted  very  much:  
someone  who  complained  that  her  head  was  too big got  another  head,  
which  was more  than  a fruit  of lime;  the one who said her legs were  
thin  had got other  legs, which  were  like elephant's  le^;  the one with  
small  eyes  had  eyes  which  were  like table-clocks;  the one  with  big eyes  
had eyes  like those  of a chickeri.  So were  (the situations  of) things:  in 
an upheaval,  because  God the (heavenly)  King  did not create  those  
things  which  the people  were asking  for as part of. their physical  
make-ups.
"'After  every  individual  of the children  of the world  ha4 asked  his 
question  and told the Representative  of God that they did not want  
the things  they  had first asked  for anymore,  this fellow  from  heaven  
burst  into laughter^® ’ and  he answered,  and he said,
'"You children  of men, don't you know that he who is the 
co-ordinator  of the creatures  is wiser  than  the rest  of creatures!  Go and 
observe  the leaves  on the top of the trees  and look  at the little  marks  
which  God the (heavenly)  King has artistically  made;  you go and 
observe  the animals  in the forest  as they  are many  and  are strong;  and 
are following  the paths  on which  their  creators  had set their  feet;  you 
go and take note of the host of snakes  in the world;  you look at die 
ants as they are so many;  look  at all kihds  of fishes,  you look  at most  
of them  which  live  both  on the land  and  in the water;  don't  you know  
that He who made  all these things  is wiser than all the rest of the 
creatures!  You men, if you are aspiring  to advance,^®^  it is a good  
thing;  but if you are talking,  if you are despising  God,  you are like a 
sculpture  which  has eyes,  but it cannot  see with  them;  which  has  nose,  
but it cannot  smell  with it, which  has ears, but it cannot  hear with  
them .2^2 A coveteous  person  cannot  be happy,  even  if the world  got 
as small as the mouth  of a gourd.  You, to whom  God has given  
wisdom,  but do not use it, have  you ever heard  a lion come  to God  
the (heavenly)  King  on any  day,  and  tell Him  to build  a palace  for him,  
because  he is the king  of the animals?  Have  you ever  seen  a spider  say 
that he would  not spin a thread  anymore?  Have  you ever seen^®?  a 
cock  say he would  not crow?  Observe  the birds  in ttie air, buff-backed  
heron  is flying  from  one tree to the other  every  year; a partndge  is 
looking  for its food  on die farm;  a bat is eating  through  the mouth,  
and it excretes  through  the mouth;  the body  of other  birds  is like the 
body of a white cloth; others  are like velvet;  another  is like an 
indigo-dyed  cloth,  which  has been  dyed,  and has become  very  black  
indeed.  Don't  you know  that diese  diings  are amazing!  You should
113






struggle  to advance  in all good  things;  but do not stretch  your  hands  
to that  which  your  hands  cannot  reach.  Immediately  a child  stoops  to 
pick up a coveteous  attitude',  his patents  ought  to scold  him;  not the 
parents  alone,  biit aU,*tlfe  relatives  as well.^  Coveteousness  is the 
child  of envy's  jnother;  both  envy  and  jedlousy  are one and the same  
thing.  Jhere'ffere,  you children  of men take note of your way. I am 
going  to heaven  today;  God  the (heavenly)  King  has given  me an order  
again,  that  I should  put  you  in your  former  conditions.  Good  bye from , 
today  on; I shall  not come  to you  any more;  go on with  your  lives;  man  
is different  from  an angel;  those  in the world,  are different  from  those  
in heaven."  '
"Thus  did the-Representative  of God,  and he went  to heaven,  and  he 
never  came  back  again;  learn  from  this, you Olowo-aiye,  my friend.'
"Thus  did Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  end his speech;^®  after this, 
we got off the top of his house;  we came  to the bottom  of the building;  
we were  enjoying  ourselves.  It was not yet dark  at the period  which  I 
am talking  about.  When  my friend  thought  of something  with  which  
he would  exercise  ourselves  for a while,  he suggested  that  we should  
go to Disease's  home  — who is the wife  of Death  — but I refused  his 
suggestion,  for when  I got to the house  of her  husband  before  this)  the 
house  was  not inviting;  it is not a good  thing  for one to go see Death,  
and then  to go and see Disease.
"After  this, we went  back  and climbed  to the top again,  and when  
we got up there,  I sat down  for a while  without  talking;  I got up, and 
I put my hands  in my pant's  pockets,  like the time when the' 
educated^S^  ones  were  bluffing,  and  after  I had  walked  stately  up and 
down,  I went  down  on my bottom  on the chair;  I put  my right  leg on 
the left leg, and I held my knees  with both my hands;  I leaned  
backward  very  well  on the chair;  I told  Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke  that 
I wanted  to hear  a little  more  talk from  his mouth.
"After  I had  said this, die man  started  to talk again;  he said,
"'My  great  Olowo-aiye,  you are a fop — a real  man —I salute  you 
for die enjoyment  of my home.  I want  to tell you a short  story  today,  
and  I want  you to. take  note  of the story;  perhaps  you  might  be able  to 
extract  one or two wisdoms  from  it.
'"It  happened  once  upon  a time;  a king  sent  his wife  to go and  cook  
a soup for him.  It was not long  after  that  that the wife  brought  three  
fresh  fishes  before  this king  — one was  black;  one was red; one was 
white.  The  one that  was  black  was  very  black  indeed;  the one that  was 
red was very red indeed;  the one that was white  was very white  
indeed.  These  fishes  were  a surprise  to the king;  thus he ordered  his 
wife  to go and cook  them  for him,  and she went.
'"It was not long after this,  when  she came  back  before  the king,  
panting,  and she began  to speak;  she said, 'Your  Highness,  I saw 
something  terrible  today.  As I was cooking  those  fishes,  I was going  
to turn the soup  on the fire; your  highness,  the wall  of the house  in 
114






which  I was  cooking  the food  suddenly  split  into two,  and 1 saw  a girl 
with  a sword  in (her)  hand  who  threw  off my fish  on the fire.  This  was 
all I saw,  your  higlmess;  I fell down,  and I fainted.  When  I woke  up, 
I looked  at my soup;  the fishes  have  changed:  they  were  deeply  black.  
. '"When  the woman  finished  Ker talk, the king  got up, and he said,  
'Go  on and  show  me the fishes,'  and  both  of them  were  going  together . 
When  they  got to the house  of food,^^^  the king saw that it >vas true 
that those  fishes  changed  and became  black  like the bottom  of a pot 
of soup,  and  this  was  a surprise  to whoever  saw them.  Because  of this, 
the king quickly  sent for the fisherman  that he should  go and catch  
these  three  types  of fishes  for him.
'"In  a short  while,  this fisherman  brought  three  fishes  like the first 
time,  and  the king  followed  his wife  to the house  of food;  when  he got 
there, he said that his wife should  start cooking  the soup in his 
presence.  As this woman  was cooking  the soup,  with  the king  sitting  
down  by the pot  of the soup  which  was  boiling,  with  the crown  worn  
pointedly  (on his head)  the woman  took  a spoon  and  was  stirring  this 
soup;  but as,the  spoon  touched  the fish,  the wall  of the house  split  into 
two;  instead  of a girl  who  darted  out the first  time,  a strong  man  came  
out  with  a sword  in his hand,  and  he turned  the soup  over  on the fire. 
The king fell down,  and the king's  crown  flew forward,  the king  
fainted;  the wife fainted;  the messenger  who followed  the king  
fainted;  it was  when  the wind  blew  over  them  that they  woke  up.
"'When  the king  got up and went  into the palace  and was rested,  
he sent  for this fisherman,  and  he told  him  to catch  three  fish like those  
again.  That one went  again;  he went  and found  these strange  fish 
(again);  this man was going  with joy, because  whenever  the man  
brought  these  fish,  they  paid  him a lot of money.
"Before  the mah  brought  the fish which  the king  sent fc5r, the king  
had sent for his chiefs  saying  th  at.  they should  come  to his palace.  
When  they arrived,  he told them  all that his eyes  had seen,  and told 
them  also,  that  he wanted  the thing  to happen  in their  presence.  These  
chiefs  thanked  the king, and they said with one accord  thus: "The 
owner  of the authority  second  only to a god,  we are grateful,  we will 
wait  for the matter  to occur  in our presence.'
"'In a short  while,  the king's  wife came  to tell the king  softly  that 
the fisherman  had brought  the fish; and thus the king ordered  that 
.they should  bring the fish before  him; he said, 'Son, the matter  
between  you and I has gone  beyond  secrecy;  bring  the fish,  and  let us 
cook  the fish.'
. "'So  they  began  to cook  the fish, and when  it was  time  again  to stir 
the soup,  and  when  a chief  took  the spoon  and  began  to stir the soup,  
the wall  of the house  split  into two  again,  and  seven  big  men  came  out 
with  two-edged  swords  in their  hands,  and they  turned  the fish over  
into the fire again;  trouble  ensued;  chief  was bumping  against  chief;  
queen  was  bumping  against  queen;  the king  jumped  out through  the
115






window  and the king's  fidwing  gown  was flying  in the air as he was 
running  away.
'"After  the king's  face had calmed  down,  he decided  in his mind  
that  he was  going  to investigate  these  fishes  — the fish  which  a person  
must  not  cook,  except  if the fellow  is prepared  to run a race—the king  
told  the fisherman  that  he should  prepare  in the  morning  of the  second  
day, so that he should  take him and his chiefs  to the river  where  he 
caught  those  fishes.
'"When  it was dawn  file second  day,  after  the chiefs  had  gathered  
together  in the palace,  they  were  ready  to go to the river,  the man  took  
all of them,  and he was taking  them  along.  It was surprising  to die 
people  that they  did not walk  for more  than  three  hours,  when  they  
readied  the strange  river,  and nobody  had ever  seen  the river  at the 
place they found  it. When  they got ’there, they saw that it was a 
stagnant  river.  'They  walked  along  the bank  of diis.  river,  in order  to 
see (it clearly):  they  walked  forwards  and  backwards,  the river  was  as 
clear  as mirror,  and they were  looking  at those  fish plainly,  as they  
were following  each other  around  in the water.  But how this river  
found  its way there,  and how the fish in it got to be different  from  
other fishes,  this matter  was beyond  the understanding  of all the 
people.  After  a while,  it was dark,  and all of the people  made  their  
bedsteads  by the bank  of this stagnant  river;  they  went  to sl&p.  The 
moon  was  like  the  noon  day;  but as they  were  all asleep,  the king  dSuld  
not sleep  at all: he was  turning  around  on the bed,  because  he did  not 
understand  the meaning  of this river.
"'At  last when  his body  could  no longer  bear  it, he got up, md  he 
woke  up his second-in-office;  he told him that  he was going  for file 
investigation  of the river,  and  that  if it was  dawn,  and  he hadn't  come  
back,  his second-in-office  should  tell the people  that he was a litfle  
tired,  and that  he had slept  in a small  house  he had quickly  built  by 
the bank  of the river.  After  the king  had made  finis arrangement,  he 
headed  into the forest;  he and  God  five (heavenly)  King;  he was  going  
around  the forest.
"'After  it was a long  time that the king  had been  walking  around  
in fine moonlight,  thus,  he suddenly  saw a big house  in whidt  was  lit 
a light.  This  house  was  Very  beautiful;  it was  even  more  beautiful  than  
his own  palace  itself.  The  door  of the house  was  opened,  and  he went  
in. When  he got in there,  he was  looking  around  to see if he could  find 
a person ’ in it; as he was doing  this, he began  to hear someone  
screaming  in a certain  room;  (the  person)  was  dying.  When  he got to 
the place  from  which  the noise  came,  he saw a handsome  man,  vffio  
was sitting  on a chair.
"■'He  greeted  the man,  and he asked  a. question;  he said; "Accept  
my sympathy,^®®  what  is really  wiwig  With  you, which  makes  you 
cry thus,  you grown  up (person)?"
"The  man  answered;  he said, 'You,  if .you  had known  what  is the 
116






matter  with  me, you wouldn't  have  said thus."
"This  king  answered  him again;  he said.  Please,  be not unwilling  
to tell me what  is wrong  with you, for we don't  always  know,  God  
might  make  it possible  for me to be the one who  can help  you.
"After  this, the man  picked  up his own  story,  and  he began  to tell; 
he said;
"I am sorrowful  man, who is suffering  in the hand  of a woman.  
Death  is better  for me than  shame.  I was formerly  a king,  and I had a 
wife whorh  I trusted  very much  (little  did I know  that) she was an 
old,289  witch.  In the evening,  after  I had eaten,  she always  put vicious  
spell  in the water  that  I would  drink,  and  I would  not know  anything  
about  it as for as I was  concerned.  This  spell  was  to make  me fall asleep  
faster  at night,  and that after  I had fallen  asleep,  I would  not wake  up 
till dawn,  when  she would  wake  me up herself.
"She  did these  to me several  times  without  my knowing  anything  
(about  it). May  God  deliver  us from  a hypocritical  woman;  the mouths  
of such  people  are sweeter  than  sugar-cane,  honey,  and they  can take 
care of men  more  than  anybody  in the world;  their  knees  are not far 
from  the ground;  they  can kneel  down^^®  for multitude  of times  in a 
day. The vicious  woman  deceived  me several  times,  before  God  
leaked  out her secret.  Thus  it was:
"'When  I was  lying  down  at night  one  day,  closing  my  eyes  without  
being  asleep,  something  happened.
"'Two  of my house-maids  were talking  to each other. One 
answered;  he said, 'It's a pity; this man cannot  give himself  a day 
without  saying  that  it was medicine  that  his wife  put in his water  for 
him to drink  every  night.  The second  one answered;  he said, 'l am 
surprised,  but the medicine  is powerful  indeed;  whenever  .she gives  
it to our boss,  immediately  he will fall asleep,  and he will not wake  
up unless  the woman  herself  wakes  him up. The first  one answered  
again;  he said, 'Yes it was after the boss  had falleh  asleep  last night  
that she went  out, and the cock crew this morning  before  she came
'"Thus  were  the maids  talking  without  knowing  that all they said 
were  in the palm  of my  hands,  any  my  body  began  to get  very  restless
"When  it was time to sleep,  I quickly  jumped  on my bed, and I 
pretended  drat  I was  asleep,  I was  not  really  sleeping.  The reason  why  
I did that  was  that  when  I ate in the evening  of that  day,  I did  not drink  
the water  which  the woman  gave me; I threw  it away  through  my 
window,  without  her knowing  that I did so.
"'As I got on the top of my bedstead  in the night  of this day that 
we are talking  about,  my wife put out the light  in my room;  she got 
up; she ate an alligator  pepper  in the mouth,  and she spewed  them  
out on my body;  she said, 'When  an attic wood^ ’^ is asleep  it never  
gets  up; you  hard-headed  fellow  diould  not  wake  up until  I get  back.
"After  she had said  thus,  she faced  the way,  and she was going;  I
117






too gently  got up; I pulled  out my machete;  I began  to follow  her 
quietly.  What  surprised  me was that  all the door  on the  way  began  to 
open  as she was  passing  along,  withouther  using  keys  to open  them,  
but as she was going,  I was following  her along.
'"After  a while,  she came  to a plain  outside,  and I too followed  her; 
after  this, she left the midst  of the town  completely;  I was following  
her. After  a long time, she turned  to a path;  I also turned  after hen 
When  she had gone  very far on his path,  she came  to a plain  place;  it 
w'as very  flat indeed?  When  she got there,  she came  to a plain  place;  it 
was very flat indeed.  When  she got there,  she met a man  who was 
waiting  for her there.  The man  wore  a big garment;  it was a flowing  
garment,  white,  which  the embroiderers  had adorned  with lots of 
beautiful  designs.  When  my wife came  before  him, he began  to be 
angry;  he said, 'You  have  taken  too long today;  when  you know  that 
you would  not  be able  to come,  why  didn't  you say so yesterday;  I do 
not  want  people  to bluff  on me like that  at all; you mustn't  do that  any 
more  forever.'  After  he had said that, my wife knelt  down,  and she 
began  to beg him;  she said  that  he should  not be angry;  (that  she was 
late)  because  her husband  did not sleep  on time;  she hugged  this man  
and they  began  to kiss.^^^
After  a while  they  began  to talk about  me, and my wife  began  to 
leak  out  all the secrets  that  I had  placed  in her  hand.  When  they  began  
to talk about  me, when  the first one was abusing  me, and they were  
entertaining  themselves  with the matter  about me;^^^  they were  
saying  it scoffingly,  and they  were  calling  me a name  that  (my)  father  
and mother  did not give me. I was angry;  I pulled  out my machete,  
' and I jumped  into their  midst  like lightning;  I stabbed  the man,  and 
he fell down.  My wife  ran away,  but she did not know  that I was the 
one.
"'After  this, my wife  came  back,  and climbed  to the top of the bed, 
and she slept  by me. When  it was dawn  the second  day, I did not act 
as if I knew  what  had happened.  This wife of mine  was the one who  
first greeted  me: she knelt  down  and touched  the ground  very  well 
with her head,  and when  she was about  to kiss me — the vicious  
mouth  vyith  which  she was kissing  a father-with-a  flowing-garment  
in the middle  of last  night  — I turned  my mouth  to another  direction;  
I told  her that  my mouth  was  hurting  me.
"'When  it was time to eat breakfast,  I ate, and after  I had eaten,  I 
sat on a certain  chair; my wife came and knelt before  me; she 
answered,  and she said, 'Your  Highness,  the owner  of authority,  
second  only  to a god;  tire elephant's  crown-of-head  which  is not  a load  
that a child  can carry;  the father  who  surpasses  other  people's  father;  
the head  of the city; die father  of the chiefs;  the wily  one who has 
endued  them  (all) — the man;  an important  person  in the midst  of 
the important  people;  die great  one among  the greats;  a complete  
gentleman,  the man  who  comes  out  and the people  became  glad,  my 
118






dear fatiier-of-the-house;^^'^  I am only using  your (greatness)  to 
provoke  the people;  your  Highness,  I thank  you;  I thank  you greatly;  
I thank  you for your  care  over  me; whenever  I see you tfiere  is no one 
who  is handsome  in my eyes  in this  world  anymore;  you  are my god,  
and  may  God  make  it possible  for*us to gain  from  each  other.  In order,  
not  to prolong  the matter,  my  fatherof-die-house,  I have  an important,  
thing  to request  from  you.  One  older'brother  of mine,  who  had gone  
to a dist^t  place  away  from  home  just earner  back  three  days ago; I 
w^ted  to go and s^ him  yesterday,  but I did not get the chance  at 
all; all the visitors  who  came  to visit  you  yesterday  made  it impossible  
for  me tp go; but  I suddenly  got  amessenger  this  morning  saying  that 
the older  brother.of  mine  died.^^  This  matter  is very  painful  to me. 
Your  Highness,  he whom  I had  not seen  for.  the past  three  years —for 
me to see  just  his  .corpse  — this  is (indeed)  a painful  thing  to me. Now,'  
what  I am requesting  from  you is that  I want  you to give me chance  
in this palace  to make  my older  brother's  grave  there  sb that I would  
be seeing  the grave  with  my eyes;  because  the matter  greatly  affects  
me (indeed).  Your  Highness,  may  God  lengthen  your  life.
„ '"Thus  did  my •wife  speak,  she who  was  the head  of the queens.^ ’^ 
but  I did not think  at all that  it was  the man  tiiat  I saw  withner  in the 
moonlight  who was the one she was telling  me he was her older  
brother;  therefore,  I gaye her permission  to go and bring  the dead  
body,  of her older  brother;  I gave  her some  of my messengers  to go 
with  her, and all of Stem  went  with  her.
'"When  the wpman  came back and brought  die corpse  to the 
palace,  and I toqk^  look  at him, it was the man that  I saW with  my 
wife in the middle  of the night  — kissing  each other  — may God  
deliver  us from  die counterfeit  people  whom  die  children  of die  world  
of today  are portraying  a3 their  older  brothers,  who  they  are exalting  
as younger  brothers,  who  they  are respecting  as tiieir  relatives.  They  
are liars; on the day*that  the rope of secrecy  comeS  Ipose,  die real 
relative  would  not  be unraveled  clearly.
"'When  I took a look at the face of this corpse,  its body  was very  
full  of blood;  I entered  the house,  and  I took  a machete  and  put  it under  
(my).clothes,  and I called  my wife;  it was  on diis chair  on which  you 
found  mb, that  I sat. When  my wife  came;  her eyes  had  changed  from  
mine,  for she was a witch.  She had also prepared  for me; as I asked  
and  I said,  'Welcome,  is your  counterfeit  brother  in sound  health?  She 
just turned  her face on me, and she poured  certain  water  on me,and"  
she bellowed  in a loud  voice,  and I sKooksuddenly;  she said,  'I order  
it that a change  should  come  upon  you man,  for making  fun of my 
lover.  You should  change  from  your  legs to your  hips to stone,  and 
you  should  sit down  there  where  you  are, until  I come  to let you  loose.  
When  a yam  changes,  it becomes  pounded-yam;  when  com  changes,  
it becomes  search;  even  if I would  come  to bear punishment  for the 
labour  of my hands  from the host of heaven,  still, I will not be
119






unwilling  to use the power  which  the Creator  gave to the living . 
creatures  or the earth^^  in order  to do evil  to you.  As-soon  as she said 
this I saw  from  my legs to the waist,  there  was  no bone,  no flesh,  no 
vein,  no more  blood,  all around  there  turned  ta stone,  and I did not 
have  qontrpl'over  it any  more.  Since  that  day,  I have  been  on one  spot  
like this, ^d I cannot  move  (my)  body  any more;  I do not eat, and I 
am not hungry  either,  and I have  not died."
'"After  he had  said  this, the man  pulled  up hi^ clothes;  when  tins 
king  looked  athim,  truly,  from  waist  up to (his)  head  alone  was  flesh,  
bone,  and blood;  from  the buttocks  to the downward  area,  down  to 
the soU  of (his) feet,  he was stone  completely.
'"After  this, the king  asked  this man  where  his wife,  a witch  was,  
and  he answered  him  thus,  saying,  'My friend,  I do not  know  exactly  
where  she is, but  what  I see is that  since  she  had  turned  me to the way  
you  now  meet  me, she had  turned  the city  over  which  I was  a king  to 
a stagnant  river  which  you see over there  witti  her witchcraft.  The 
three  types  of fishe^  that  are in the river  are the three  types  of people  
in my town:  some  hre Christians;  some  are Moslems;  and some  are 
pagans.  Since  the day  that  woman  had  done  so, she has gone  to dig a 
big hole  in the middle  of the house  in which  you  are now;  shexiug^frie  
hole a little deep,  and she put her lover  whom ’ I beheaded  in it. She 
did not cover  the corpse  with  earth;  but ^e tied it uj., and she put it 
there,  with  the hope  that a day was coming  when  the corpse  would  
change,  and  her lover  would  get up to come  and meet  her.  The thing  
that  is going  to amaze  you  most  is tfxe thing  that  I am going  to tell you 
now.  The  woman  used  to come  to tiiis house  every  day early  in the 
morning,  at about  5 am.;  she always  took  a load  of whips  withher,  
and whenever  she came,  she would  start to beat me with  the whip  
until  she  exhausted  one  hundred  whips,  before  she stopped.  After  ^e 
had finished,beatihg^ne,  she would  go to tire place  wiere  the dead  
body  of her lover  was  in the hole;  whenever  she got friere,  sh^ would  
say the following  words:  she wopld  ,say, 'My friend  on eairth,  my 
friend  in heaven,  on what  day are you coming  to see me?  Because  of 
you,  I obliterated  an entire  town;  because  of you,  I dethroned  a person;  
my  friend  on earth,  my friend  in heaven,  on what  day  are you  coming  
to see me?'
'"Thus  she used  to say everyday;  and when  she had  whipped  me 
for a long  time, she would  go to the counterfeit  older  brother,  who  is 
dead,  and  she would  be begginghim  to come  from  heaven  to see her.
"'After  the man  had  thus  spoken,  the king  to whom  he was  talking  
was sad. In the first  place,  he was sad to h^  about  the punishment  
which  this man  was taking  on this <Hie spot;  in tfie second  place,  he 
was  happy  because  he found  what  he was looking  for; he found  die 
source  of the stagnant  river;  he knew  the reason  for. (die  existence  of) 
these  three  types  of fishes.  He asked  the man  a question,  and  he  said,  
'Friend,  is the woman  coming  early  in die morning  today?'The  man  
120






answered,  and  he said,  "It is ajnust."
'"After  this, the king  applied  one tactic:  he took  his little-gun;  he 
fjut  it in the pocket  of his pant;  he went  info  the grave  of the woman's  
over,  which  was in the palace.  When  he got there,  he observed  how  
they tied the corpse  very  well;  after  tiiis,  he untied  it, and he packed  
the bones  which  he got, and  he thfew  them  away.  After  this,  he gently  
covered  himself  witii  Jhe cloth;  he did not tie.it  too tightly.  He gently  
held  his gun  with  his'right  hand;  he kept  very  quiet;  he was looking  
at the eyes  of the world.
"Truly  Vihen  it was early  in the dawh,  the wornarrcame,  and she 
began  to rain whips  oh her husband;  she whipped  him until die 
exhausted  one  hundred  whips . This  husband  cried  a hot  cry;  he sighed . 
the sigh  of frustration;  he begged,  and  begged,  still the  worrian  did  not 
stop her hand  of whipping.  She had forgotten  God the (heavenly)  
King.
'"After  she had beaten  her husband,  she came  to the grave  of her 
lover;  she shouted  as she  used  to shout,  "My  friend  on earth,  my  friend  
in heaven,  on what  day are you coming  to see me?  Because  of you,  I 
obliterated  an entire  town;  because  of you I dethroned  a person;  my 
friend  on eartii,  my friend  in heaven  on what  day are you  cortiing  to 
see me?"
"'After  she had said  thus,  the king  who  was in the hole  answered  
her;  he said,  "My  friend  on earth,  my friend  in heaven,  I am at the gate 
of heaven.  The gate-keeper  did not open  the door;  he locked  the door  
of heaven  against  me. If you want  rhe to come,  go and change  your  
husband  back  to a human  being,  so he would  be as he was  before;  then  
the gate-keeper  will open  the door,  arid I will come  to see you."
'"When  he answered  thus,  this woman  was so happy  so much  so 
that as she was running  to go and take the medicine  with  which  she 
was going  to change  her husband,  her head-tie  fell off; her clofllfiS^^®  
came loose;  her drawers  was the only tiring  that remained  on her 
buttocks  as she was running  along.  When  she drank  water,  she put 
the medicine,  and  she went  to her  husband  and  threw  it over  him,  and 
she .said, "I command  you to stand  up and walk  arourtd;  the head  
cannot  be too  heavy  for the neck  for  the owfier  of the body  to carry  
Immediately  she said this, the legs that had been a (solid)  rock  
changed;  and it became  human  body,  And this man  got  up.
"'After  she  had  done  this,  the woman  came  back  to the grave  of her 
lover;  she called  him in a loud  voice,  'He whom  I love  more  than  all 
persons,  I have  finished  the errand  which  you sent  me.'
"'And  the  king  who  was  in the hole  replied  again,  and  he said,  "It 
remains  only  one  task  for  you  to perform:  go and  change  thatstagnant  
water  back  into  a town;  turn  the fish  in tiiere  back  into  human  beings;  
after  tills,  I shall  come  out  as a king  over  tiie town;  you  will  be the  head  
of my queens;  you will  be wearing  the crown  of money,  and  you  will 
be wearing  the gown  of beads;  thus the male mesS^gers  and the
121






female  messengers  would  be comiftg  in and  out before  you."
'"When  the woman  heard  these  words,  she went to apply  her 
medicine;  immediately  change  had come;  the stagnant  water  had 
become  a city; the fishes  became  people;  they were selling  
merchandise  and  they  were  buying  merchandise;  they  were  entering  
the house,  and they  were  coming  out.  After  this,  she went  back  to die 
king  who  she thought  was  het lover.  When  she got to the edge  of die 
cave she spoke,  she said; "My  lover,  I have  done  as you have  said,  
come  on, you,  who  are my lord."
'"At  ^s time,  the king  answered  her;  he said,  'I have  come;  I have  
come  (back)  from  heaven,  my special  lover,  come  on into  the hole  and 
pull  my hand  up.'
"'This  woman  was  happy  about  die words  that  she  heard;  she took  
her cloth,  and  she wrapped  it around  herself  very  well;  she tightened  
the head-tie  over  (her)  chest^^^  very  well;  she was going  into  the hole 
to meet  the one  whom  she thought  was  her  lover.  The  king  in the grave  
adjusted  his gun  very  well;  when  he saw that  she  was  drawing  closely  
to him,  and that  he had  seen  her whole  body  clearly,  he aimed  at her 
chest;  he stabbed^®^  the gun;'dlE-gun  sounded;  die dead  body  of the 
hard-headed  one sounded  'boom'  on the ground;  she died com­
pletely;  she couldn't  even  move  her body.  Thus  the vidous-headed  
one  finished  her  own  (life)  in the  world;  the  moon  of the  vicious  person  
, sank  into the dark;  the secret*  of the worthless  one leaked  out. The 
world  thus understood  the language,  that if a vicious  person  is 
thriving,  the gcxid  people  should  not change  their  attitudes  because  
of that: a day  is coming  for her; I think  that  the elders  were  telling  us 
in those  days  that all clays  belong  to the thief;  die owner  has but one 
day.302
"Thus  my friend  concluded  this story;  great  man;  my true friend,  
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  who  was  living  on the Hillock  of the rock.
122






Parting  with  Baba-Onirungbon-  yeuke  
Who  lives  on the Hillock  of the Rock
“As Baba-Onirungbon  ended  his speech,  a messenger  of his came  up 
from  downstairs,  and told him that some  guests  had come  for him,  
and all of us went  down  to go and see the guests.
“It was  a surprise;  when  we gotdownstairs,  we saw  that  die guests  
were  not two nor three;  drey were  a little  bit many.  When  I counted  
them,  they  were  twenty-four.
■ “After  Baba-Onirungbon  had greeted  them  and had asked  them  
how they walked  to get there  and they explained  to him that they 
missed  their  way,  and had strayed  into Igbo Olodumare,  he greeted  
them  very  well  again;  he also  gave  them  room  in his house.  After  they  
had  gone  to the place  he had given  them,  I also  got up to go and greet  
them.  It was then that I observed  that I had known  many  of them  at 
home  before.  What  happened  was that they too did not look at me 
very  well at first.
“The first fellow  whom  I first observed  was a man whose  name  
was  Ijambaforfti^'^^  who  was  an elephant-killing  hunter . The  man  was 
a famous  person,  for when  he first  started  hunting,  he did something  
which  amazed  all of the people  in our town.  Ijambaforiti  was passing  
by one day, when  he saw an elephant's  trunk  in the river.  When  he 
saw this, he took  an arrow  from  his quiver;  he pierced  the trunk  with  
force,  and the arrow  penetrated  deeply.  When  this elephant  picked  
Ijambaforiti,  it threw  him on a tree, and when  elephant  saw that he 
was on this tree, it uprooted  the tree, and when  the tree fell, it fell on 
the elephant,  so Ijambaforiti  fell on die elephant  again;  it was  on this 
same elephant  that,  he took another  arrow  from the quiver  and he 
pierced  it. As this animal  was struggling,  Ijambaforiti  rolled  off and 
fell on the ground  from  the top, and he was wounded,  and nobody  
knew  these  things  at home,  and  it was  about  three  days  before  he came  
home.  But at long  last, the elephant  died.  Since  that day, the people  
started  calling  him  Ijambaforiti,  the father  of elephant.^*^
“When  I looked  at him  very  closely,  and  I knew  it was  him,  and  he
123






also looked  at him  very  closely,  and  he knew  that  it was  I, we greeted  
each  other  with  joy; I said, 'Ijambaforiti  the father  of elephant.'
"He too answered  me; he said, 'It is I, the man.' '
"I burst  into laughter  again,  and I said, 'Ijambaforiti  the father  of 
elephant.'
"He  also  drew  closer  to me;  he said,  'This  is me in your  hand .' When  
he drew  close  to me very  welt  and playing  with  me, he pressed  my 
stomach  with his hand; he said, 'Olowo-aiye,  your stomach  is 
protruding',  I also said, 'What  else shall  we do?'
"As Ijambaforiti  and I were playing  this way, I saw one of my 
people  whose  name  was  Enia-^pele^^^who  was  my  ih-law  at home,  
because  he was  the one  who  married  the daughter  of my  older  brother  
who  was  my relative.  He was a wise  man,  and all of us in our house  
loved die man. It was at die time I was getting  ready for Igbo  
Olodumare  that he was celebrating  the death  of his father^®^  whose  
name was Iwatiitu  who was an important  person  in our town.  
Enia-se-pele  was a very  gentle  man,  and  he was  handsome  as a man.  
It was right  plainly  in my presence^®^  they gave  twelve  girls  to Enia-  
se-pele  as gifts^^^  at die same  time,  but  he did  not  marry  them.  He was 
a very  wise  fellow,  for as girls  were  entering  his house  in the noon,  
and  were  entering  in there  in the middle  of the  night,  he did  not  marry  
them,  after  he had married  my older  sister's  daughter  of whom  I'm 
talking  about.  He was the one who  used  to sing  a song  in our house  
thus,  'One  woman,  a lotof  enjoyment;  tvyo  women,  two  troubles;  three  
women,  three  troubles,  four  women,  four  troubles;  five women,  five 
troubles,  six women,  six troubles,  seven  women,  seven  troubles;  etc.'
"When  Enia-se-pele  and  I saw  each  other,  we embraced  each  other,  
and  he also  told  me a lot of things.  As we were  rejoicing,  I was  looking  
at a man,  who  had  been  laughing  since  die time  I had reached  these  
guests'  place,  and when  I looked  at him closely,  I saw that  it was the 
fellow  whom  I had known  (before).  He was completely  an unwise  
person;  his behaviour  was like drat of an animal,  and his steppings  
were  like those  of sheep.  This was die reason  why all the people  of 
our town  used  to call him Agutte-iniki,-^^  a dumb  man.  He was a 
fellow  Who  did not know  (anything)  more  than  to continue  to laugh  
(at all times).  He never  (had  time)  to think  even  for, a day, and if a 
person  was  behaving  stupidly  in our town,  they  used  to compare  the 
fellow  with Agutan-inaki,  whose  was a dumb  man.
Agutan-inaki  used to prepare  food for his wife in their home.  
Whenever  he finished  pounding  pounded-yam,  and had prepared  
and had finidied  cooking  soup,  he would  place  diem  before  
his wife,  and diat one (the wife)  would  be scolding  him saying  that 
the food  he had  prepaid  was  not  good  enough,  she would  be hissing  
and complaining  alxmt  the food.  Agutan-iriid  was a spoilt  person:  
he was  one of those  who  never  knew  when  people  were  making  fun 
of them;  when  they  put on a buba^^^  and you began  to flatter  them  
124






saying  that they were wearing  dandogc^^^  made  out of sanyai?'^'^  
material,  they would  be pleased  with you; when they put on the 
clothes  which  do not fit them,  and you said that their clothes  were  
better  than  that  of a king,  they  would  be pleased  with  you;  when  they 
spoke  at a meeting,  they would  be asking  continuously;  'Don't  you 
see that my speech  was better  than that of die rest (of the people)?'  
This  is the type  of person  that  Agutan-inaki  was . Because  of this,  when.  
I saw  him, I only  greeted  him  through  my nose
"Another  person  whom  I observed  that  I had known  (before)  was 
one Ifa priest,  whose  name  was  Ewedaiyepo.^^^  The man  had a lot of 
medicineAll  the people  in our town  knew  him. He lived  in the 
ground-hole  for seven  days,  when  he took  one gnome  as wife,  before  
they  left each  other.  There  was  not a leaf in the forest  which  this man  
did not know,  and there  was no root of a tree that could  hide from  
him. He used to talk to trees;  he understood  animal's  language;  he 
understood  diat of birds,  and he understood  that of the fish in the 
water.  When  I saw him, I began  to call him by his oriki; I said,  
'Ewedaiyepp,  the world's  herbalist;  Ewedaiyepp  the heaven's  
herbalist;  an important  one of the Ifa priests,  a deamonic^^®  man,  
Ewedaiyepp,  you  in a playful  manner,  you  became  their  husbands,^^^  
he who  in a joking  way,'became  the father  of evil spirit;  he who  made  
a sigid?^^  his servant  who made  a loincloth  out of leather  girdle.  
Ewedaiyepp,  the man;  you  are their  fattier;  you  have  been  made  to be; 
he who  walks  around  arrogantly,  is going  to experience  a disgrace.'
"Thus  I started  to say this man's  oriki,  and he too was nodding,  
answering  me at intervals.  Immediately  I stopped,  I saw 
Ewedaiyepp  stick  his hand  in his pocket,  and  he brought  certain  white  
medicine  out of a gourdlet,  and  he began  to rub my head  with  it, and 
my head became  white — thus Ewedaiyepp  turned  me into a 
while-headed  fellow  on the sweltering  afternoon,  and all the people  
were  looking  at my crown  of head  as they were  greeting  me, for if it 
were  a black  medicine,  it wpuld  have  suited  my head.  I began  to beg 
for soap around  unexpectedly,  and I used up to a penny's  worth,  
before  I wasn't  white-headed  fellow  any more,,
"After  this,  the one  whom  I observed  again  was  a man  whose  name  
was lbanuj^isale.32^  I did not greet  the man  very  well,  because  since  
the day I had  known  him,  I had  never  seen  laughter  in his mouth.  He 
was one of those  who  had bad behaviour,  in terms  of frowning  their  
faces  at all times;  nobody  knew  the difference  between  the time  that 
they  were  happy,  and the time  that  they  were  unhappy.  And  this type 
of attitude  gives  one a (bad)  name  and throws  away  a persons  oppor ­
tunity;  it always  turns  a big person  to a small  person;  a gentlemen  who  
sees that this kind  of attitude  is becoming  habitual  with  him should  
quickly  deviate  from  the attitude,  because  it is a stain  on a fellow  .^22 
When  I saw  Ib^uj^isale,  I looked  at him  with  small  eyes,  and  when  
I was  going  to grrat  him,  I greeted  him  like an unimportant  person.
125






As I was looking  at Ibanuje-isale,  I saw a fellow  whom  I had 
known  very  well before.  The man  could  Sing a lot, and he could  talk 
a lot; thus people  called  him organ-voiced  (man)  in our town.  When  
I looked  at the direction  where  he was, and I saw  him,  I called  him,  I 
said, 'My friend,  Mr. Organ-voiced  hello:  it's been  quite  a long  time.'  
He also answered;  he said; O, yes, Olowo-aiye,  this is me in your  
hand.  I also  answered  again:,I  said;  'Organ-voiced  man,  who  sings  like 
a bird';  he also answered;  he said, 'Olowo-aiye,  it is I who  have  told 
you, there  is nothing  (wrong  with  me) the body  of a man  is always  
very  strong.  I salute  you  for  your  eating;  I salute  you  for  your  drinking;  
I salute  you for eating  without  asking  about  me.'323  After  this, we 
greeted  each  other  very  well  again,  and  we made  a lot of jokes.  But  he 
could  talk  a lot: If one  wanted  to stop (and  talk  to him)  for two  minutes,  
one would  stay  for four  minutes.  When  I had stopped  for a long  time'  
and Organ-voiced  was tying  me down  with talking,  I began  to go 
without  asking  to be excused  by the people.
''As I was  going.  Organ-voiced  was  looking  at the back  of mV head  
until  the time  that  I suddenly  heard  the fellow  hiss,  and  he said,  'Look  
at the back of his head.'  When  I looked  back, I saw that his 
countenance  was  not good  towards  the back  of my head;  I said;  'Why  
don t you go and sit down,  people  look  at another  fellow's  back  of the 
head;  they  never  look  at their  own  back  of the head.  You  can talk  of a 
lot; I do not have much time as you do; things  should  always  be 
limited.
"Those  who were important  among  the pilgrims  that I knew  are 
the ones  I have  just listed  as follows:
"Baba-Onirungbon  was very hospitable  to them  that night;  all of 
them  ate, and they  were  filled  to the.brim.
"When  I saw how many  these guests  were,  and tire amount  of 
money  that Baba-Onirugbon  had been  spending  on me since I had 
arrived,  I was greatly  surprised.  If a gentleman  goes  to a plaqe  as a 
guest,  he needs  to know  when  it is time to leave the place,  for the 
unenlightened  people  do not recognize  the attitude  of greed  as a bad 
thing;  if your  host  begins  to spend  too much,  it behoves  the guest  to 
know  that  he has to get ready  to go. Even  if the hosp24  insists  that  one 
should  stay,  one ought  to continue  to say the one is going.
"After  we had  eaten  the evening  meal,  and  all of us were  sitting  on 
the mat in a row, and we were  talking  in the moonlight  with  Baba-  
Onirungbon,  I started  talking  about  going  (back);  I asked  from  Baba-  
Onirungbon,  if he knew  the way we could  take to get back to our 
house.
"When  I said this, Baba-Onirungbon  told us that truly  there  was  a 
road  by which  we could  go to our house,  but  he told  us that  also that 
the road was verydangerous  indeed.  He again  emphasized  it very  
well,  that  we should  not think  about  going  at all; because  if we went,  
there  was  no doubt  that  many  of us would  perish  on the way.
126






“When  I told him to give-some  advice  (about)  the way through  
which  we could  go; he told us that the advice  he could  give us was 
that we should  stay there  with  him, and that we should  find  work,  
and that we should  eat out of our labour.  After  he had said this, 
Enia-se-pele  asked  him  again;  he gaid  that  he should  tell us the.  things  
that  could  be problematic  to us on the way,  and  the man  enumerated  
the problems;  he said that we would  pass through  the town  of the 
snakes,  where  Ojola-ibinu^^  was reigning  as the king,  and that  if we 
were  not careful,  we could  lose our lives  there.  After  this, he told us 
again,  that  we would  reach  where  there  were  seven  women  who  were  
always  chasing  each  other  alf their  lives,  and that if we looked  into 
their  direction  and  saw the type  of play  they  were  playing,  we would  
not be able to help it; whether  or not we wanted  to, we would  join 
them  in the play,  and tfiat we would  not be able to get out of there  
forever.  He. also told us various  other things  that would  be 
problematic  to us: he spoke  about  some  vicious  gnomes  and  two  birds;  
the carnivorous  animals  and the poisonous  grubs.  Thus did 
Baba-Ohirungbon  enumerate  all those  vicious  tilings  that could  be 
obstacles  to us on the way,  if we insisted  that  we were  going.
“After  he had  ended  Ids speech,  Ijamba-foriti  got up in our midst,  
and  he began  to speak;  he said,  'You  my  comrades,  all, look  at me very  
well,  I, Ijamba-foriti  the father  of the elephant.  I do not  mind  an uproar  
in the middle  of the rught.  I am asking  all of you today,  can a person  
find an important  thing without  meeting  > with an important  
difficulty?  Have  you seen  anyone  who  had reached  a great  position  
without  having  done a great  thing  behind  them?  He who is in tiie 
world  and walks  (around)  with  fear, is not among  the living;  if the 
great  people  were  telling  all the things  theyliave  come  across  before  
they  became  great  people,  other  people  would  have  been  praying  to 
die in backward  positions.  Therefore,  we must go.-My  dear  
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  I thank  you all for your  taking  care  of us in 
the past,  may  God  enrich  your  pockets.  This  is what  I want  you to do 
for us: I want  you  to describe  the way  for  us very  well,  for if God  does  
not reject  (my)  promise,  I would  not be here at the dawn  of the day 
tomorrow.  There  is no one a person  should  be afraid  of; except  God.  
Death  is better  for a gentieman  than insult;  it does not behove  a 
gentleman  to walk  around  like  a greedy  one;  if we go to a long  distance  
away  from  home;  we must  take home  the reward  of the farm;  it is a 
must  that  we should  go.'
“Thus  Ijamba-foriti  spoke,  and all of us kept  deadly  silent;  as he 
was going  to sit down,  he stcxxi  up again,  he faced  us, and he said,  
'You our people,  we are going  tomorrow;  you follow  me; I will be 
your  leader,  ^gin  to tie your  luggage;  make  your  hearts  strong;  we 
have  an import^t  person  in our midst:  Mr. Olowo-aiye  is here;  he is 
an important  person;  Enia-se-pele  is also here; he is an important  
person;  here  I am also,  Ijamba-foriti,  the father  of the elephant;  God  is
1274






for us; we are going.'
"When  ^amba-foriti  had sat down  the second  time, I got up; I 
backed  his speech  up. After  I had  sat down.  Organ-voiced  got  up, and 
he also began  to speak,  and the voice  of Organ-voiced  was so sweet  
^at  when  he sat down,  Baba-Onirungbon  looked  at his face;  he said,  
'God  has put salt-on  your  lips';
"Thus  we all spoke  with  the determination  that  we shall  go on the 
second  day,  by God's  power.
"After  we had  thus  determined,  and  Baba-Onirungbon  saw that  it 
was  certain  that  we were  going,  he decided  to help us to die extent  of 
his ability.  He entered  and  he brought  out  a flute,  and  he showed  it to 
us. He asked  us if there  Was anyone  who knew  how to play  a flute  
among  us, and  Organ-voiced  answered  him  that  he could  play  a flute  
very  well.  After  this, he put the flute  in Organ-voiced's  hand,  and  he 
told him that  when  we were  getting  near  the town  of the snakes,  he 
should  start  playing  it, and that if the police  who  were  Watching  the 
gate  of their  town  heard  the flute  all of ttiem  would  fall  asleep . He told 
us these police-snakes  who were watching  were the most terrible  
ones;  for if we  were  able  pass  them,  our  troubles  would  be over;  unless  
we did not follow  all the things  he had told us. He also gave  us one 
rule  after  this;  that  we should  not kill any  snake  at all in the town,  and 
he inculcated  that  on us very  strongly.  He told us that  he who  killed  
a snake  in the town  of the snakes  would  experience  the fight  of a snake  
and it was specifically  a taboo  in that  town.  He warned  us very  well,  
because  if we got  into  the town,  we  would  be seeing  all kinds  of ^kes  
that would  be playing  around,  selling  merchandise  and buying  
merchandise  in our presence.  After  that,  he spoke  about  Gjola-ibmu,  
who  was  the king  of the town  of-the  snakes  among  the creatures  that 
were  crawling  on their  chests,326  must  be careful  not to
fight  with  the snakes  in the town.  After  this,  the man  gave  a big  gourd  
to Ewedaiyepo;  the body  of the gourd  was  black  and  shinny;  they  tied 
the bones  of snake  around  the neck of the gourd;  its mouth  was 
OTvered  with  varioufc  kinds  of feathers.  The  man  told  Ewedaiyepo  that 
it was  poison  antidote327  jj^g gourd,  and that  until  w’e got
home,  each  one  of us should  be taking  half  a spoon  out  of it eveiyday,  
and that if we ’ did this, no snake  poison  could  harm us. But he 
impressed  it upon  our ears^^S  very  well that the power  of the half  of 
a spoon  which  we would  take would  not last more  than  a day; we 
must  not skip a day without  taking  this medicine^^^  until  we should  
get home.
"Baba-Orurungbon-yeuke  did a lot for us. He also  gave  us a bottle  
of water,  and he told us that if we experienced  any difficulty  on our ’ 
way,  th^water  would  be of help to us. He told us that  the water  of a 
river  flowed  fiirough  heaven,^^  and  that  there  was  no one  who  could  
take  out  of the water,  his eyes  saw something,^^  because  he told us 
that if it were  not because  of his friend.  Death,  whose  house  was
,128






midway  between  earth  and heaven,  he would  not have  been  able to 
fetch  die water  at all. As he had told us, when  he was going  to fetch  
the water,  he borrowed  the garment  that the dead^^  used  to wear  
before  they could  to go heaven,  from  die hands  of Death,  that was 
what  he wore  before  he could  get to the bank  of this strange  river  
which  flowed  through  heaven.^"  The man  told  us also  that  whoever  
fetched  the water  in heaven  must  not face (the direction  of) die water  
when  he was  fetching  it; instead  of that,  he had  to turn  his  back  against  
it. The  reason  was that nobody  should  look  at the water,  because  he 
who  looks  at it would  be looking  at the throne  of God  the Master  of 
glory and die powerful  in-spirits  who were standing  around  the 
throne  of God and were praising  Him  who made  them,  who made  
others,  who  made  all of us. And, he who sees the holy ones who  
Surrounded  the throne  of God,  has seen something;  he who  sees the 
shadow  of God sees trouble;  he who knows  the seat of the Creator  
would  not be able to imagine  what  would  happen  to him.
' 'Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  told  us diat  the water  in the bottle  which  
hegave  to us was  a strange  water,  and  that  there  was  nothing  we could . 
not  do with  it: if we poured  it on shrub  and  we told  the shrub  to change  
' to a human  being  it would  become  a human  being;  if we said that it • 
should  change  into an animal,  it would  become  an animal,  because  • 
the authority  of God  was  on its body.  About  its use,  Baba-Onirungbon  
told us thus:  he said, 'When  you are using  this water,  you must  not ' 
eat oil,'334  you must  not eat s^t; you must  not eat pepper;  you must , 
be naked  completely,  just  as, you came  to the world,  and  the way  you 
would  go to heaven.'
"Thus  did the man  try his best possible  (to help us), and all of us 
thanked  him very much.  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  is a gentleman,  
who lives  on the hillock  of the rock: he took  care of us very much.  
When  it was the morning  of the second  day, when  we were  going  to 
leave  the house,  I almost  wept,  because  I had nothing  to give to the 
childmn  of the house.  When  I searched^^^  in my pocket,  I found  only  
three  pence,  and  I was  ashamed?to  give  this to them.  When  I searched  
in my pocket  again,  I found  one bean-cake  which  my mother  gave  me 
the other  day, and I took  a little  out of it, and gave  them.  My certain  
pair of shorts  was what I gave to my friend's  messengers.  But 
Baba-Onirungbon  was not happy  about  all this solicitude  that I was 
showing;  all his cares  over  us was not a big deal to him. He was one 
of those  that would  not do kindness  in order  for people  to repay  it, 
the hope  of whom  is in the hands  of God  the (heavenly)  King.  Those  
who  know  that  most  of the children  of men  are vain,^°  and  if he who  
is doing  the act of kindness  hopes  that  tiie people  to whom  he is doing  
the act of kindness  should  appreciate  the kindness,  that fellow  is 
leaning  his back  against  emptiness.  I suppose^^  that  when  the Son  of 
God  himself  did an act of kindness  to the ten lepers,  it was only  one 
of them  that came  to express  frianks!^®  The children  of the world
129






always  w^t  to dig out yam  where  they  have  never  sown  yams-  they  
always  ask for bananas  where  they  had not kept  banana;  those  who  
oan^  give  out ap^y  always  want  people  to give them  six pence.  
Therefore,  I senously  prayed  so that my friend  would  know  that I 
knew  the worth  of what  he had done  for me, and I rejoiced  to know  
hat he himself  knew  my worth,  because  when  we parted  with  each  
° t" ‘“‘I other:  we were  still writing
each  other,  and  I am still getting  his letters  up till today.  You  will read  
some  of the letters  we wrote  to each  other  later.
we left Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke's  who was living  on the 
hillock  of the rock  s place,  our eyes  saw something339  on the way  the 
one  whidi  the mouth  could  speak  about,  and  the one the mouth  could  
not speak  a^ut  were  the things  that we saw with  our eyes and the ^gs  which  we came  across;  if it were  not because  God  was a great  
yP person  who would  be talking  (a^ut  It) today.  When  it was the afternoon  of the second  day that  we 
°'elock  exactly,  we came  near  the town  
of the snakes  where  Ojola-ibinu  was their  l^g.
to hear  the cries  
squirrels.  After  a while,  when  we came  to a 
strert,  we were  looking  at those  police  of the snakes  afar  off; they  were  
sliding,  and they  were  linking  at our direction.  My buttocks  turned  
..into  water; the string  of my pants  came  untied.3^  What  (actually)  
sensed  me was that the police  resemble  human  beings  a little  bit f ejr like human  heads,  but their bodies  were snake
bodies.  T^ey  had two feet which  were  short,  and they were  walking  
well. Their  tails were long, and their bodies  had large scales  
There  was not anyone  among  those  police,  who was not as big as 
greatly  looking  man. They (certainly)  daunted  one very
w Organ-voiced  had begun  to-
k J f blowing  the flute,  we saw that all of them
had fallen  asleep;  we simply  passed  them  by. But it hurt (my heart)  
that It was there  ^at  Agutan-inaki342  lost his life. When  we woke  up 
m toe mommg  of the day we were  going  to this town  of the snakej  
and we began  to drmk  the antidote  which  Baba-Onirungbon  gave  to
■ 1 medicine  was too bitter,  and he did not
drmk  it with  us on that  day. When  we were  getting  close  to the place  
where  the policemen  were,  he said he wanted  to pass stool,  and we 
v^re  waiting  for him to finish  quickly,  but when  he did not finish  on 
tittle we got ready,  and we were  walking  slowly  along  before  he got fim,^ed.  Wl»  we passed  the police,  welaw  hii coming  down,  ^Td 
u ®^«ke  before  he passed  themy. But  when  Agutan-inaki  was coming,  he began  to make  noise,  and 
® ’"is voice  filled  the whole  forest
greatly.  When  this  noise  was  too much,  the police  snake  woke  up, and 
130






they caught  the fool and bit him. Immediately,  the snakes'  poison  
gripped  the man. Let us not drag the matter  as long as earth and 
maV^  it was there  that  Agutan-inaki  just  ended  his own  life.
''Thus  we did, and we lost one of our people,  Mr. Agutan-inaki,  a 
dumb  man;  when  all of us were  crying,  Ijamba-foriti^^  did not cry at 
all; instead  of that,  he began  to whistle  a proverbial  song  saying,  'A 
blind  man  who closes  his eyes and says  he cannot  see, when  he was 
not asleep,  what  did he see? He who does  one (in) does  himself  (in). 
This  means  that  it was  Agutan-inaki  who  did himself  in with  his own  
hands.'  Agutan-inaki  was.  singing  so that the police  snakes  would  
wake  up so that  they'would  disrupt  the faces  of all of us, but the more  
he shouted,  the faster  we walked;  when  the police  woke  up, they did 
not see us anymore,  but they saw him. Till we got back  home,  if a 
person  said  he was  not going  to take  a medicine,  we used  to call him 
Agutan-inaki.
"When  we left those police snakes'  place, we started  meeting  
snakes  one by one,  but they  did not bite us; they  were  just  going  their  
own (way).  When  we walked  a little,  we began  to see all fences  that 
the snakes  made,  (the  fences)  in which  they  put  a lot of frogs,  and they 
were taking  care of them.  As we were  walking  closer  forward,  we 
continued  to see these  fences  of frogs —(the  frogs) —which  the snakes  
were  domesticating  like goats.  Frog  is their  food,  and they entertain  
their  guests  with  it. In these  fences,  I saw with  my naked  eyes,  a frog 
as big as a rooster.  The path  to the snakes'  town  was smooth,  but it 
would  have  been  better  if it were  not for many  of their  skins  which  
they peeled  on the ground  which  created  debris  along  the path.  At 
times  when  we were  going,  a snake  would  suddenly  fall on the road  
in front of us; sometimes  a snake would  fall on our shoulders;  
sometimes  the snakes  would  coil around  our feet, they would  be 
playing  with  us.
131






8
Ojola-ibmu  who is the Head  of all the 
Snakes  in the World
"As  we entered  into their  town  itself,  something  happened  to us.
"When  a snake  began  to coil round  his body,  Ijarnbaforiti's  body  
rejected  this punishment,  because  the snake  began  from  his feet to the 
shoulder;  when  it reached  his shoulder,  it stopped;  it did not go any 
more.  After a while again, the second  snake started  to crawl on 
Ijarnbaforiti's  body;  this also  crawled  on his body  up to his shoulder,  
and when  the two s.akes  saw each  other,  they  began  to play  around  
the man's  neck.  When  it had  been  long  since  they  had  been  there,  and 
they  did  not  go away,  Ijambaforiti  became  angry;  heheld  his  pant  and 
tightened  it tightly;  he took  his gun;  he adjusted  it, and he faced  us; 
he looked  at us as a powerful  person  looks  at a person;  he burst  into 
laughter;  he said,  'He who  wants  to die meets  him  who  wants  to kill 
him; I Ijambaforiti,  the man; I can take all.  things  but I do not take 
insult,  a person  does  not die twice;  if death  takes  me, I will follow  
death.'
"As soon  as he said this,  he took  both  of these  snakes,  and dashed  
them  to the ground.  After  this,  he took  a stick  and beat  them  on the 
head  — something  had come!  t
"As Ijambaforiti  had done this, we suddenly  heard  a bell which  
rang,  and  before  we blinked  our  eyes,  those  police-snakes  had  arrived,  
and  they  began  to bite  us, but  their  poison  had  no effect  on us, because  
of tile medicine  which  we had  eaten  in the morning  of that  day.  When  
they saw that nothing  happened  to us, they took us to the house  of 
Ojola-ibinu  who  was the head  of all the snakes  in the world.
"A! God is great  a King!^^  When  we got before  Ojola-ibinu,  the 
thought  in my mind  changed.  I did not titink  that I would  be in this 
world  ^y more.  Since  the days  that I have  been  walking  around,  I 
had never  seen a creature  as daunting  as Ojola-ibinu  who was the 
head  of all the snakes  of tiie world.  Ojola-ibinu  was  very  big  indeed;  
it was a creature  which  crawls  on its chest.  But it had the head  of 
human,  except  that its mouth  was bigger  than that of a person.  A 
132






sheep  could  not fill Ojola-ibinu  at a time;  he used to eat up to two 
whole  cow  s whenever  he wanted  to eat.
"When  we got to the palace  of this  king  of the snakes,  we met  him 
on the throne;  he sat  in a royal  state,  and  all his chiefs  surrounded  him.  
This king  was so handsome  that his whole  body  was as if a host  of 
precious  stones  were  gathered  together  in one  place;  after  Ojola-ibinu  
had coiled  around,  it looked  like a small  hill.
"When  they  took  us before  tire  king  of tire snakes,  he was  very,  very  
angry  wherrhe  saw us, and  his head  began  to get bigger;  all his chiefs  
began  to hiss  and  were  angry  because  of us. When  Ojola-ibinu  began  
to talk,  his throat  began  to roar  like thunder,^^  and  his eyes  were  like 
red beads.  He bellowed  with  anger;  he said  thus:
"Man!  Man!! Man!!!  You have come  here seeking  for me; you 
children  of men!  A! A!! A!!! (No one)  except  God,  the Master  of glory  
alone  can abate  the fight  that is between  us;^^  a poisonous  snake  is 
man's  enemy;  if man  sees  a snake  in the plain,  man  kills  it; if man  sees 
a snake  in the secret  man  kills it; there  is no enmity  which  is like die 
enmity  between  snakes  and  man,  except  the enmity  which  is between  
the son of die Devil  and die son of God  die (heay^y)  King.
"Take  these  ones,  you  my police;  take  them  to my  courtyard.  Look  
for the fat one among  diem,  slaughter  him for me; I shall  make  all.of  
them  my food;  the end  of a.murderer  is destruction;!  must  kill those  
who  kill my children;  a day is coming  when  die day  would  dawn  on 
those  who  pursue  their  neighbours,  as long  as my heart  is still alive,  
i shall  not see die son of man  with  my eyes,  and  let the son  of man  go.'
"When  he finished  saying  this, the vicious  creature  burst into 
laughter,  and  his chiefs  shouted  in one  voice,  Tour  Highness,  the one 
widi  authority  the second  (in rank)  to the gods;  the death  that  kills  the 
disobedient  diild,  a trouble  upon  die children  of man,  the  powerful  
over those  hard  headed  ones.  Your  Highness,  Your  Highness,  Your  
Highness.'
"After  this, they  took  us to the backyard,  and  when  we got there,  we 
met twenty-five  people  like us there.  Those  people  had strayed  into the 
hunting  forest,  and'they  had fallen  into the h^ds  of the king of the 
snakes.  When  we got to where  they  were,  and we looked  into one part 
of the courtyard,  we saw  the skeleton  of human  skulls  which  were  there;  
they  were  more  than  one thousand.  At this time  that  I am talking  about,  
I was  not  afraid  any  more,  because  my mind  had  begun  to get  out  of the 
world,  and  I had  begun  to think  about  heaven.  Those  police  arranged  all 
of us in order;  they  examined  all of us along.  They  felt  our  buttocks  with  
their  hands,  and they  examined  our chests  to see how  much  fat we had. 
When  they  got to me, they  took  a certain  man  who  was  standing  by me, 
who  was  a little  fatter  than  I was,  and  when  they  had  examined  him,  they 
slaughtered  him  right  in our presence.
"After  a short  while,  they  brought  food  for us, but I did not eat the 
food,  because  when  they  wanted  to bring  the food,  I heard  them  when
133






they were having  an arrangement:  they were complaining  in the 
kitchen  whether  or not the medicine  they had put in the food was 
enough  to make  us fat. The messengers  of the king  were  just talking  
secretly,  but I stood  close  to the wall  of the kitchen,  and I heard  what  
diey were saying.  My partners  ate the food, but I ate out of the 
bean-cake  which  my mother  brought  for me from the hole’^S of the 
dead.  Before  the morning  of the next  day, all the people  I came  witii  
had changed:  they had become  big and fat. Enia-se-pele  and 
Ewecbiyepo  who  had not been  as fat as I was,  had got bigger  than  I 
was.  Ijambaforiti  whose  body  had been  very strong  had become  one 
whose  body  had become  soft, and he was fat and sleek.
"When  I saw  this, I called  my colleague  in a secret  place,  and I told 
them  what  I had observed  and heard,  and I told them  also, that I had 
a bean-cake  in my bag which  couldn't  be exhausted,  no matter  how  
thought  we should  just be eating  the bean-cake.
When  it was noon  the second  day, the messengers  of Ojola-ibinu  
came;  they took Mrnebody  who was fat among  us; they slaughtered  
him  again  for their  king.  Ijambaforiti  was  almost  taken,  but  when  they  
examined  him carefully,  they said that he was not fat enough  for 
consumption.
"Thus  they  began  to give  us food  at various  times  on that  day,  but 
none  of us ate their  food.  When  it was the third  day, they took one- 
fellow  ameng  those  that we met there  again.  They  slaughtered  that 
. one again  for their  king.
diey  began  to kill us one after  the other,  and I was  expecting  
me day when  it would  be my turn to die; but as they were  bringing  
food for us, I did not eat their food;  it was the bean-cake  which  my 
mother  gave  me that  I was eating,  and it was that that the rest o'f my 
colleagues  those  of us who  left Baba-Onirungbon's  house  — were
eating.  This  also  did us a lotpf  good,  because  it did  not allow  us to get 
fatter,  instead,  we were  getting  thinner,  as we were  Blinking  about  
what  we were  going  to do. After  they  had killed  many  of us, and those  
of us who were left were  not many  anymore,  we began  to be afraid  
that at last they  might  come  to take us, whether  we were  fat or not. 
, certain  day, I lifted  up my eyes; I called  upon  God; I said.  
Thou  Cod  the (heavenly)  King,  may  it please  thee  to come  and  deliver  
me from  this bondage.  There  is nothing  difficult  in the hands  of God  
the (heavenly)  King;  there  is no sorrow  that  can come  upon  the son of 
man, there is no trouble  that can come  upon  man, from which  you 
caiinot  bring  man  out: from  the hands  of the sorrow  of (the pack  of) 
money,  from  the hands  of the sorrow  of (lack  of) child,  from  the hands  
of the sorrow  of the enemy  in the house,  from  the hands  of the sorrow  
or the enemy  from the outside,  from the hands  of the sorrow  at the 
working-place;  from  the hands  of the sorrow  of the relatives,  you  God  
are the only  One  on whom  one can lean  one's  back;  deliver  me O God;  
God  deliver  me from the hands  of Ojola-ibinu;  deliver  me God:  God
134






deliver  me;  from  the  hands  of the police  snakes,  deliver  me;  God,  God,  
deliver  me; from the hands  of being  locked  up in the sweltering  
afternoon,  deliver  me O God;  O God  deliver  me.
nrhus  I began  to say. Little  did I knoW  as I was speaking,  one of 
these  police  snakes  was  hearing  what  I wassaying,  and  this  police  was 
one of the messengers  whom  the children  of men  used  to come  and 
meet  in the world  — those  who  are lazy  and  the hypocrites  who  used  
to be tale-bearers  in order  to curry  favour  from  their  bosses  — so that 
that  fellow  would  not know^ ’ their  secret.  This  police  snake  took  my 
matter  to Ojola-ibinu;  he said that I had handed  him (Oiola-ibinu)  to 
God  the (heavenly)  King.
"When  Ojola-ibinu  heard  this, he bellowed  greatly,  and his voice  
roared  like thunder;  he said, 'Who  is the God who can deliver  ypu 
from  my trap,  you children  of menl^SO  What  does  God  amount  to in 
my  presence?  Truly  the earth-spirits^Sl  say  that  God  created  all things  
in the world  and in heaven;  even  if it were  so, I myself,  I am great  in 
my own royalty:  I am the head of all the stakes  in the world.  
Tomorrow  is your  last day on earth,  when  your  cranium  would  go 
 into  my pot of soup;  if I do not kill all of you tomorrow,  you might  as 
well say that it was  not my father  who  begat  me.'^^
"When  I heard  about  this matter,  I was sad, but when  I thought  
about  the matter  again, ’ I was  happy.  On one  hand,  when  I heard  that 
the day  of my death  had  been  named,  I was  sad;  on tire other  hand,  I 
knew  that  the destruction  of C^ola-ibinu  was  not too far away,  for on 
any day that a creature  says that the matter  about  God is not worth  
anything,  that fellow's  destruction  has already  begun.  I kept  quiet;  I 
was  waiting  to see what  God  would  do.
After  a short  while,  I called  all my  colleagues  together;  I asked  that 
each  of them  should  let me know  the weapons  that  were  in his hands,  
and  I fold  diem  point-blank,  that  we ought  to do something  before  die 
creature  slaughtered  us to eat. I remembered  the fight between  
Anjonnu-iberu  and I at the gate  of Igbo  Olodumare,  thus  I promised  
to perform  seven  wonders.  All diose  who  were  imjxirtant  among  us 
were  happy  about  my suggestion.  Everybody  was prepared  to fight  
a litde  fi^t,  so we*  would  act like men.
"But  diose  police  have  taken  all our  weapons  since  we had  arrived  
there,  and they  had  put  them  in the treasury  of Ojola-ibinu,  and  them  
were  many  siiakes  guarding  the treasury.
"As  we Were  thinking  about  how  we were  going  fo get our things,  
Ema-se-pele  told  us that  he had  had  a fnend  among  those  messengers.  
Litde  did  we know  that  as we  were  dunking  about  death,  Enia-^pele  
was  thinking  about  the way  out,  and  he had  found  a way  to know  the 
secret  of the place.  Ojola-ibinu  was  one  of those  creatures  who  do not 
take dare of their  houseboys;  since  we had  refused  to eat our  food,  
Enia-se-pele  had been using  die food to curry the favour  of this 
houseboy.  We.didnot  even  know  anything  in our  own  case,  but  what
135






we were seeing  was that whenever  they brought  food, it was 
hnia-se-pele  that was getting  it from them;  and we did not know  
where  he was taking  it to — we did not know  that  he was  giving  this 
food  to the houseboy,  and  they  became  each  other's  friends  from  that 
point.
"When  we called this houseboy,  and I took a little out of the 
bean-cake  and gave it to him, we begged  him to go and bring  our 
things  out from the treasury  house,  and he also agreed  with  us, but 
he told  us that  it should  be at the time  that  the ones  guarding  the  house  
would  finish  the day's  work,  and leave  the palace,  before  he would  
go and  bring  our things.
"At  five  o'clock  in the evening,  those  who  were  guarding  the  house  
finished  their  work,  and they  left the palace.  As they  were  leaving  the 
palace,  this houseboy  entered  the treasury  house  and brought  our 
luggage  out.
"We gave most  of our medicines  to Ewedaiyepo  to take care of 
them,  for he himself  was  a herbalist  who  loved  bluffing:  if we touched  
his medicines,  he would  be threatening  us, and  he was  eating  alligator  
pepper  in his mouth  at all times,  and he used to call the name  of 
Oduduwa;  he used to talk about  Agbonniregun, ’^^ he was always  
plucking  leaves  around  the forest.
"When  we had gathered  our  weapons  together,  and  we had given  
our  important  medicines  to Ewedaiyepo,  we began  to think  about  the 
way  to go. Before  we could  go, we had  to kill Ojola-ibinU  himself,  and 
that  was  a big thing.  When  we thought  about  the way  we were  going  
to do this and we could not find one, Enia-se-pele  gave us a 
suggestion.  Ojola-ibinu  was  a creature  who  was  crawling  on his chest,  
and it .was on his chest  that  he crawled  to take a bath  everyday.  He 
used to go and take a bath at ten o'clock  in the morning  every  day. 
This  was.Enia-^pele's  suggestion:  that  we should  go and  find  many  
matchete  and sharpen  them,  and make  them  very  sharp;  at night,  we 
should  go and bury  those  matcheted  with  their  sharp  edges  outside.  
When  C^ola  went  to bath,  if he put his mouth  on the machetes,  and 
the matchetes  cut  him,  he would  want  to quickly  get out  of that  place,  
and when  he ran forward,  then the machetes  would  be cutting  his 
chest  along.  By so doing,  he would  cut his guts out. This suggestion  
was good,  in our view;  we thanked  Enia-se-pele,  and we decided  to 
' follow  tile advice.  We gathered  the machetes  together;  we sharpened  
them,  and  they  were  as sharp  as pen-knives.  When  it was  in the  middle  
of the night,  we went  to bury  the machetes  on the path  of Ojola-ibinu,  
and  we turned  the sharp  edges  up all along.
"After  this, we tied our luggage  and put them  down.  Everyone  of 
us took  his own  weapon  in his hands,  but  most  of our medicines  were  
in the hands  of Ewedaiyepo.
"Very  early  in the morning  of title second  day,  Ojola-ibinu  truly  got 
ready;  he was  going  to bathe  without  knowing  that  the day  had  come  
136






when  God would  tell him that He was existing.  When  he put his 
mouth  on the sharp  machete,  the machete  began  to cut him,  and he 
also began  to run forward;  the machete  began  to cut his belly  along.  
After  a while,  Qola-ibinu  bellowed  so loudly  that  all the people  of the 
town  woke  up from their sleep, and the earth  shook  greatly.  This  
creature  began  to struggle,  but as he was doing  this, all his guts  came  
out, and tine ground  was filled  with  blood,  and something  happened  
among  the snakes.  Before  Ojola-ibinu  died,  he knew  that  we were  die 
ones,  and  he shouted  our  names  all the way  to heaven.  He shouted  in 
a loud  voice  saying,  'Man!  Man!!  Man!!!  I have  gone  away  from  you!'
"Thus  it happened  that when  Ojola-ibinu  Blasphemed  God the 
(heavenly)  King,  (his) guts  came  out; the liver  came  out; the stomach  
came  out in die plain.  May  God  forbid  this type  of thing  in our midst.  
, "But  we too have  known  that  he who  killed  the head  of the snakes  
is pulling  die leg of trouble;  the eyes  of he who  behaves  in the way  we 
had behaved  would  see something.  Since the strange  creature  had 
shouted,  we all had tightened  the strings  of our pants.  But when  
everyone  of us had taken  his machete,  and had carried  his gun, and 
we saw that the medicine  in our hands  would  not be enough  for the 
fight,  and  we wanted  to go and see our  important  medicine  which  we 
gave  to Ewedaiyepo  to keep,  we could  not  find  Ewedaiyepoanymore;  
he had absconded  completely.  Little did we know that when  
Ojola-ibinu  bellowed  greatly,  Ewedaiyepo  had  climbed  up to the attic.
"As we were looking  around  for Ewedaiyepo,  somebody  came  
secretly  to tell us that Ewedaiyepo  was not in the room,  and that  he 
had  run up to the attic.  This  made  me to go and  search  the attic  to see 
whether  or not the matter  was true;  when  I got there,  I met the man  
where  he stooped  down,  so I got the medicines,  and  I hit his pate  with  
our medicine  bag; I was going,  and I was hissing  — in my own  case,  
—he also  shamefully  followed  me.  Thus  there  are many  people  in our 
world  who are calling  themselves  Ifa priests,  but who are not bold,  
enough  to use the m^icine  which  they know;  thus they  frightfully  
turn themselves  into frivolous  person,  fie who has medicine,  but is 
not bold  is not as strong  as the one who is bold,  but does  not have  
medicine  at all. But we made  fun of Ewedaiyepo  because  of this 
matter.  The matter  never  parted  from  our mout^  until  we left the 
town  of tine snake,  until we got back to our hometown.  Whenever  
Organ-voiced  stood  up, he would  turn  his face to us: he would  say, 
'You my friends,  when Ojola-ibinu  shouted  a great shout,  
Ewedaiyepo  did what?'  All of us would  respond  in unison  that 
'Ewedaiyepo  climbed  up to fine attic.'  And Ewedaiyepo  would  get 
annoyed:  he would  say,  'I don't  like  that,  Olowo-aiye,  I don't  like  that.'  
At times  he would  say, 'Enia-se-pele  be very  careful;'  he used  to say 
so to us whenever  we were  happy,  and  we began  to make  fun  of him.
"After  we had taken  all our medicine,  we got prepared  to fight  a 
war,  and the snakes  rumbled  with  us in the fight  also."
137






'Ijanjbaforiti  was  the one  who  first  finished  tying  things  around  his 
body  among  us; as he got ready,  he darted  outside,  and he shouted;  
he said, 'He who is up to it, let him come  out, Ijambaforiti  is ready;  
Ijambaforiti  is going.'
"Immediately  he said that, a host of the snakes  who had been  
standing  around  the palace  knew  that we were  the ones  who killed  
their  king,  and before  we blinked  our eyes,  Ijambaforiti  had gone  to 
them,  and some  of our people  followed  him. Enia-se-pele  and I and 
Ogan-voiced  were  in Are palace  over  there  with  the rest  of the people;  
we were  getting  ready.  Since  the king  had died,  the messengers,  the 
chiefs,  the wives,  and the children  had  run  away.
"When  we got ready  in die palace,  and we go out, we, with the 
guns  and  our machetes,  fought  a big fight  with  the people.  The snake  
coiled  around  Ijambaforiti,  to the extent  that we could  not see him 
anymore.  But  when  we looked  at the ground,  we saw  the dead  snakes  
all over  the ay it please  thee  to come  and  deliver  me  from  this  bondage.  
There  is nothing  difficult  in the hands  of God the (heavenly)  King;  
there  is no sorrow  that can come  upon  the son of man; there  is no 
trouble  that can come  upon  man,  from  which  you cannot  bring  man  
out: from die hands  of the sorrgs  of (the drinking  it, we did not see 
certain  six people,  and  when  the fight  was  hot, five out of them  died.  
The  sixth  person  who  was  the younger  brother^^  of Agutan-inaki  on 
the motherside  whose  name  was Ile-nu-ikii-wV^®  died  on the way,  
after  we had left the town.
"This  fight  was so much:  it surpassed  what  mouth  could  describe,  
but at last, we were  grateful  to God  the (heavenly)  King  that  we were  
the  victorious  ones.  When  we  were  beginning  to get tired,  Enia-se-  pele,  
who  had  not  eaten  oil, who  had  not eaten  salt, had taken  a lot of sand;  
he had put it into die big pots all along;  after  that, he took  die water  
which  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  had  given  to us; he sprinkle^  it on the 
sand,  and  he shouted  in a great  voice;  he said,  'I corhmand,  in the  name  
of God, the living Lord, the Holy One, the Master  of glory, the 
Mediator,  the One on whom  one leans  one's  back, die merciful,  the 
wondrous  One, the Creator  of man,  the Creator  of the universe,  the 
Creator  of heaven,  the Creator  of everything  which  we see, the Creator  
of the things  invisible.  He whom  Ojola-ibinu  disparages,  whom  the 
rest of the creation  are glorifying,  that today  that I am in trouble  let 
this sand  change  and become  poisonous  ants, and let them  begin  to 
bite these  snakes  .^57
After  he had said this, the sand  truly  changed  and became  ants,  
and they started  biting  those snakes.  As the ants were biting  the 
snakes,  the snakes  wanted  to bit them,  too, and whenever  they did 
that, they were biting  themselves.  By so doing  every  one of those  
snakes  began  to kill one  another;  their  very  own  poison  gripped  them.  
By doing  so, they  killed  one another  completely';  thus  did we do and 
we were  victorious  over  them.  After  we had  done  this, we went  back  
138






to enter  into'  the palace;  we brought  food  out, and we began  to eat.
. "But  before  we did this, Enia-se-pele  and I went  to see Ojola-ibinu  
where  he was  lying  dead,  ^d  when  we looked  into  his guts,  we found  
two gourdlets:  one was (made)  of gold,  the second  one was  of silver.  
When  I turned  mine (which  was made  of gold)  upside  down,  gold  
money  began  to come  out, but Enia-se-pele  took that of silver  and 
turned  it upside  down;  money  — shillings  —3^8 began  to come  out. 
These  monies'were  coming  out forever;  they  did not stop;  with  this, I 
became  a wealthy  man,  even  though  a thief  stole  the gourdlet  at last.
"All of us ate very much  at Ojola-ibinu's  palace;  we also drank  
liquor  as well.  Ijambaforiti  was completely  drunk.  When  it was  in the 
evening359  all of us tied our luggage,  and'we  put them  on the heads  
of those  who  were  a little smaller  among  us, for we had increased  a 
little more (in number)  than the time we left Baba-Oninmgbon-  
yeukes'  house.  Those  that we met at the courtyard  of the king  of the 
snakes,  those  who  had not died,'joined  us.
• Ijambaforiti  was the one who  was in the front,  and we were  also 
following  him, along.  We left the town  with dicing,  and*it  was 
Ijambaforiti  who was'(the  vocalist)  leading  the song,  and it was his 
own  name  with  which  he was  singing  the song.  He said  we should  be 
saying  while  he would  be saying  Foriti?^^  As he was  taking
his steps  one after  the other,  all of us were  taking  out steps  in unison,  
and we were clapping  our hands.  Thus everything  became  'Foriti-  
Ijamba-Foriti-Ijamba-Foriti-Ijamba  and so on and so fortii.'  Thus  we 
did, and we left the town of those snakes,  where  Ojola-ibinu  was 
reigning  as their  king.
"It was  not too long  after  we left the town,  when  it was  night,  and 
it was  on the way  that  we slept  till dawn.  Throughout  the night  of that 
day,  we did not reach  any town  at all, but when  it was the noon  time  
of the third  day, we came  to the place  where  those  seven  were,  and 
they  were  running  around  all their  lives.  In the beginning,  at the very  
inception  of the universe,  when  Satan  fell in heaven,  and God put a 
line of demarcation  rtiid-way  between  good heaven^^^ bad 
heaven,  there  was a tree at the edge  of the chasm  without  a bottom  
which  was a demarcator  between  good  heaven  and bad heaven.  All 
the people  in heaven  used  to call the tree Temi-nikan?^'^  This  tree  had 
various  fruits,  and its fruits  were  very beautiful  indeed,  but no one 
ever touched  it, for whoever  touched  it would  experience  trouble;  
whoever  plucked  Temi-nikan  fruits  would  meet with God's  anger.  
But those  disobedient  women  behave  in the way  which  God  disliked;  
they  left where  God  the (heavenly)  King  had  put  them  in heaven;  they 
went  to pluck  Temi-nikan's  fruits.  And  after  they  had plucked  them,  
they came  into die world,  and they  gave  them  to the children  of men  
to eat. Since then, the children  of men have been behaving  
hypocritically  to one another  one does not want  the other  to have  
progress  like himself,  and they were shouting  each other's  (name)
139






around  the worldBut  a sinner  will not go unpunished,  except  if 
the sinner  repents . Because  those  women  were  hard-headed  (women),  
God  the (heavenly)  King  cursed  them,  and  He said  in His anger,  'You  
disobedient  creatures,  I created  you,  and  you have  forgotten  me. You  • 
went  ^d gave  my  people  the fruits  of Teemi-nikan  to eat, thus  you 
tumeolheir  lives  to bittemess!^^  Go; you must  not return  to heaven  
any  more.  Go to the forest  over  there;  continue  to run  around  for the rest 
of-your  lives. Be a lesson  to the disobedient  children  and an 
enlightenment  to those  with  deaf  ears,  and  you  will  never  get  out  of this 
sorrowful  condition  in which  you  are now,  until  the day  yhen  all things  
would  be changed.'
"Thus  God the (heavenly)  King had cursed  these  seven  women  
because  they  did not care  about  the One  who  created  foem.  Before  we 
left  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's  place,  he had  told  us a lot about  them,  
and  he had commanded  us to cover  our ears  with  cloth  whenever  we 
were getting  near them,  and that when  we came  to their  place,  we 
must  not look at the direction  where  they were: they were  on the 
left-hand  side,  where  they  were  singing  bad songs,  the type  of which,  
when  foe ears  hear  foem,  the  ^yes  would  want  to look  in foat  direction,  
and he who sees foem would  not be able to go any more.  Baba-  
Onirungbon-yeuke  had told  us that  whenever  we got to a jungle  that 
was  deeply  dark,  where  not  even  one  bird  cried,  where  lizards  did  not 
run (around),  where  no squirrel  climbed  foe trees,  where  we did not 
see the trail of foe animals,  we should  know  foat  we had  come^to  foe 
vicious-headed  women's  place,  and that we should  cover  our ears 
wifo  cloth  until  w6 came  to a place  foat  was  very  flat. He also told  us 
that  when  we came  to their  place,  we would  be in a panic,  and  foe hair 
on our head  would  stand  up. When  he had finished  his speech,  he 
said,  'Whenever  you begin  to see these  sings,  be ready  to run away.
"Truly  when  we were  about  to get foere,  we began  to see those  
things;  at foe same  time,  all of us had covered  our ears  with  clofo;  we 
were  goings  Thus  did we do until we went  through  foe valley.  But 
after we had gone  through  it, we looked  into our midst,  and we did 
not see one of us any more.  The man  was foe one whose  name  was 
Ibanuje-isale^^^  who was a fellow  whose  face was never  inviting  at 
any day;  he used  to tighten  his mouth  tightly  around.  We waited  for 
a long time;  we did not see Ibanuje-isale,  and we did not know  how  
he walked  in foe valley.  We blew  a whistle,  he did not  .respond;  we 
shouted  for a long  time,  we did  not see him  up till this  very  day.  Some  
people  said  foat  when  we got  to these  women's  place;  foe man  looked  
where  they  were,  and  he turned  to foeir  place;  some  people  said that 
he had  gone  (to anofoer  way)  before  w^ got foere,  and  foat  he was  lost 
in foe forest.  But everybody  was  just saying  his own (opinion),  what  
we were  sure  of was  that  we and Ibanuj^isale  left  Ojola-ibinu's  town  
together,  and we and Ibanuje-isale  did not go through  the valley  of 
foe vicious-headed  women.
140






"When  we left this valley,  we met  a gnome  who  was coming  from  
Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke's  place.  The gnome  had only  one eye. We 
greeted  each  other  very  well  when  we met  each  other,  for at that  time,  
we were  not very  mudi  afraid  of the gnomes  any more:  we were  just 
meeting  each otiier,  and we were  parting  with each other;  we were  
talking  together,  and we were  making  jokes  together,  and we Were  
deliberating  with  one another;  we almost  became  gnomes  ourselves.
'Tt was  the one-eyed  gnome  that  gave  the letter  that  was  written  to 
me by Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke.  This  was  what  was  in the letter:
"Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's  house.  
He who  lived  on the hillock  of the rock.  
Care  of the one-eyed  gnome  the 
Vicinity  of ttie house  of death,  
Midway  between  earth  and  heaven.  
The eighth  day  of the sixth  month.  
Nineteen  hundred  and forty-four  
After  die death  of Our  Lord.
"To,
Mr. Olowo-aiye,  the son of Akowediran,
My dear  Olowo-aiye,
"Since  you  left  our  place,  1 have  not  ceased  to be anxious  about  you,  
and I presume  that before  this letter  gets into your  hand,  you must  
have left the town  of toe snakes,  and you must  have  passed  those  
vicious-headed  women.
"Without  any doubt,  you must  have  met  with  all kinds  of trouble,  
but I think  you would  not forget  all the pieces  of advice  toat 1 was 
^ving  you when  you were  wito  me,' toat  before  you were  victorious  
in life, toere  were  seven  important  toings  that  you  must  do. First,  you 
must  trust  in God toe (heavenly)  King,  and make  God your  charm  
whom  you  should  invoke  in the morning;  second,  you  must  deal  wito  
people  with internal  truto;^®^ must  not find you in the act of 
malevolence;  where  you tell one thing^^®  to a fellow  over  there,  and 
begin  to carry the load^^^  of conspiracy  around;  third; you rnust  
humble  yourself:  it is the sin of pride,  of all the sins  which  toe children  
of men  commit  on earth  toat  exasperates  God  toe most.  When  the Son 
of God came  to toe world  toe other  day, he came  wito  humility;  he 
was  conceived  in a little  town;  he was  bom  in toe place  where  animals  
were  eating;  he scblded  toe proud  ones,  and he washed  the feet  of his 
disciples;  fourth,  be very  active  in your  work;  do not  be slow;  progress  
is far from  a lazy  person;  he who  sleeps  on toe bed all day will not be 
able  to stand  in toe midst  of toe important  people  forever;  fifth,  always  
be patient  wito  toe children  of toe  world,  for if you  do not  do that,  you 
would  be stupid  like them;  sixth,  do not expect,  for toe rest of your  
life, toat toe more  you do good  to toe children  of toe world,  toe more
141






you Would  receive  gratitude  from their hands-^^o  Only few of the 
children  of men  appreciate  the good  deeds  done  to them;  most  of them  
are ingrates;  he who  does  good  deeds  makes  God happy,  and this is 
why people  have  not been  angry  in a day and stopped  doing  good  
deeds;^besides,  no one knows  who  would  repay  the act of goodness;  
the peegfgi  that you think  would  appreciate  a good  deed may npt 
appreciate  it;,the  person  whom  you do not expect  such  a thing  from  
might  be the one who would  appreciate  the good  deed  which  you 
•might  have  done  to him, and might  be spreading  good  news  about  
you around;  seventh,  do not  be selfish,  you are not the only  one in die 
world;  always  help  your  neighbour.
"My dear Olowoaiye,  I thank  you for the little time we lived  
together,  and I am grateful  for the money  you spent  for the people  in 
my home,  when  you were  going  (away).  - ’ •
I put you under  die protection  of Gcxl  the (heavenly)  King.  
May  God  assist  you.
All my household  greet  you very  well.
I am your  great  friend,
Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke
"Thus  did my friend  write  a letter  to me; when  I got this letter,  it 
seemed  as if I had  seen  him  (in person).  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  was 
indeed  a person.^^l  fjg ^^s a person  on whom  one could  depend;  he 
was  not a person  whose  face  was sweet,  like honey,  but whose  inside  
was like the poison  of the night-adder;  he was  not a friend  who  came  
to one's house  and greeted-one  about  fifty times a day, while  he 
became  the chairman  where  a conspiracy  was  being  held  against  one.
"I also replied  my friend's  letter.  This  was  the way  the letter  went:
On the way from  Igbo  Olodumare,  
The tenth  day of the six month.
Nineteen  hundred  and forty-four  
After  the death  of our Lord.
"To
Mr. Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,
Who  lives  on the hillock  of the rock.
Care  of the one-eyed  gnome.
The vicinity  of the house  of Death,  
Midway  between  earth  and heaven.
My dear  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,
"It was  during  (our)  journey  that  I got  your  letter.  It was  at the time  
that I was  being  saddened  because  I missed  you,  that  your  letter  came  
to my hand.  When  I read the letter,  it seemed  as if I saw you (in 
person).  Since  the day I left there,  there  had  never  been  a day when  I 
had not remembered  you, I missed  you a lot of times;  I dreamt  of 
seeing  you several  times.
142






"Before  I continue  my wor^s,  I must  first  thank  you for your  care 
over  me when  I was in your  place,  for it is God  the (heavenly)  King  
alone  who  is able  to repay  the good  deeds  that  you  have  done  for  m^
I ®at witii  my mouth?  Was  it pounded  yam,
or ok^ or yam  or maize?  A dog  never  forgets  its benefactor:  I cannot  
forget  you forever  — you are, a person  (indeed)  — Ha! Baba-Oni-  
rungbon-yeuke,  thank  you. Just as the Moslem  remefijbers  Anabi,  
and the Christians  remember  God tire (heavenly)  King, so I shall  
remember  you  forever,
I'also  thank  you for all the pieces  of advice  which  you  gave  me; I 
have  not forgottm  them  at all: they  are in ,the palm  of my left  hand*  I 
have  not eaten  with  tire hand.3731  want  ydu to know  that  a piece  of 
advice  is very  precious;  some  (pieces  of advkse)  like silver;  and some  
other  is like gold,  yet some  other  is like diamohd  which  is a precious  
stone.  If men  were  to pay  for  (piecespf)  advice,  some  would  have  been  
more  than  one thousand  pounds.374  Therefore,  he who gives  one a 
piece  of good  advice,  that one has done  an important  thing  for the 
fellow.  May  God  not hand  us over  iitfo  an enemy's  hand.  The-advice  
of an enemy  is like an itadogun'^'^^  kn^,  but the advice  of a friend  
IS sweeter  than  honeycomb,  and  this  is wKy-it  behoves  a gentieman  to 
" think  before  he accepts  (a piece  of) advice  or kick against  it, but  you 
are my friend,  you  Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke,  'and  your  piece  of advice  
has penetrated  into  the comer  of my pate.
"I also have a piece  of advice  that I want to give to you, for 
someflung  that  affects  you  affects  me as well.  I had  observed,  when  I 
was there,  that  your  inside  is whiter  than  carded-cotton,  but I want  
you  to know  that  insides  of all the people  in the worldnot  so. You 
must  be very  observant,  for I am ^aid  of your  nei^ibours.  He who  
lives in a house  in death's  neighbourhood,  lives in a house  near  
^mething.  He who  lives  in a house  in disease's  neighbourhood,  lives  
in a house  near  trouble,  and  he who  hears  the heaven's  rooster  crow,  
must  be very  careful  (indeed).  The enemy  is in the back-yard,  while  
tile villain  lives  in one's  house,-376  if the death  from  one's  house  does  
not  kill one,  that  of the outside  will  not  kill one  eitfier,^  it is a house  
maid  that  knows  one's  secret,  but  it is one's  wife  who  Imows  the time  
one  is about  to sleep.  Therefore,  may  God  deliver  you  from  the hands  
of me enemies  in the house,  and the enemies  from  the outside.
J 'Too  much  talking  breeds  a lie; therefore,  my  words  will  riot  be too
"Greet  your  household  for me.
"We  are all in peace  here.
If the owner  of (my)  life does  not take  it tire day  is coming  
when  we would  see ourselves  with  (our)  eyes.
I am your  friend  in both  eyes^  
Olowo-aiye,
The Son  of Akowediran
143






"Thus  did I write  the letter,  and  I gave  it to the one-eyed  gnome  to 
give  it to my friend.  I will  not  be able  to say all that  my eyes  saw  before  
I got to the place  I was at first,  before  I got lost into Igbo  Olodumare,  
when  I first left my home  town.  .This was where  ffie king of Igbo  
Olodumare  was,  when  I left  my  wife,  when  I was  ready  to go and  hunt  
— the adventure  — which  led me to the point  where  I found  myself  
sitting  precariously  on the top of the tree,  for a long  time.  If I have  to 
tell now all that my eyes saw when  I was coming  back,  that would  
take another  whole  book.  But what  I can say is that it was the sixth  
month  that  I received  my friend's  letter —Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke's  
letter —that  I got  to the  place'  Where  the king  of Igbo  Olodiunare  made  
as his place  of abode.  We came  across  a host  of little  towns  on our  way,  
and the opportunities  that  I had  in those  towns  were  so many  indeed.  
I had money  upon  money,  I had a lot of medicines,  to the extent  that 
I had to look  for a carrier  to carry  my luggage  for me. But at last, I got 
to the place  where  the king  of Igbo  Olodumare  was;  joy  met  with  joy; 
laughter  was wedding  laughter;^^?  dancing  was playing  with  
dancing;  food  wa§  meeting  food;  human  being  and the gnomes  were  
hanging  their  arms  around  one another's  necks;  themews  filled  the 
entire  Igbo  Olodumare.
"After  the gnome  and I greeted  each  other,  and I had asked  about  
my wife,  he told  me that  my  older  brother  had  come  there,  and  he had 
taken  my wife to our town,  because  they did not hear from  me. He 
himself  told me also that my wife  had delivered  a baby,  and that the 
name  that was given  to thg baby  was  Akara-ogun.
"We  spent  three  days  in this king's  palace.  When  I told  him that I 
wanted  to go home;  to quickly  go and see my wife  and her child,  he 
also  agreed  with  me.  But  if it were  not  because  of my  wife,he  wouldn't  
have  flowed  me to go, for he had  told  me the other  time,  that  I should  
be living  with  him.  The king  was  ^(gdod)  person  indeed;  there  was 
nothing  at all that I lacked  in his place;  he took  care  of me very  well.  
He was not among  those who, when God barely  takes them to 
positions,  they  would  be looking  down^® ’ upon  others;  they would  
be thinking  that ^ey are the only ones for whom  the world  exists,  
without  knowing^at  even  a little  child  often  knows  the place  of an 
adult's  fall.  He who  steps  on a cobra's  tail would  experience  a snake's  
fight;  he who  stands  on the slope  side  of an automobile  is playing  with  
death.  He who  is grown,  and  does  not have  the attitude  of an adult  is 
still a child.
"Thus  I left the king's  place,.and  I came  to my home  town.  I was 
happy  when  I saw my p^ple:  my wife  rejoiced  a lot;>we  played  imtil  
the night time, and-  we ate a delicious  meal, because  I brought  
partridge  as she had told me to, when  I left her in the camp  at Igbo  
Olodumare  and  went  to hunt.  My child  had  started  walking  very  well 
before  I came,  my first bom,  Akara-ogun,  and I could  not tell tire 
extent  of my joy when  I saw  him.
144






Wius  went  my autobiography.  That  which  I had written  down  
would  show  my children  in the future,  what  my eyes  had  seen  before  
I nvamed  my wife,  and that  which  my eyes saw after  I had married  
her, before  I could  see with  my own  eyes,  the child  who  was  mv first 
Dom.
® ‘lown  a part  of his autobiography.  I
p®**' '^te  for so long that my shoulders  becaine  sore.  Akara-ogun,  who  was  the son  of Olowo-aiye  
was the one readmg  the story  to me,381  and  when  he finished  reading  
it, he answered;  he said,  ®
deliver  it to the children  of the world;  do not be weary.  If people  read  
your  b^k,  and by so doing,  God teaches  them  some  Wisdom,  that 
means  ^at your  coming  into die world  benefits  your  neighbour  332 
Please  I beg  you humility  is important  in behaviour:  do not  compare  
you ’re*! 'A®'  *^®y  the gift that  God  had
' P”^® J*’'® S™'  and they  would  sayth^ they are the only ones in existence.  There  is no one, (who is 
Oieavenly)  King.  Remember  that he who  
made  the dust  on the ground,  who  made  the water,  who  made  the air 
^d made  die free, that One can use others  for the redemption383  of 
the children  of the world.  Be grateful  to Qod,  the Master  of glory,  if . 
you are exited  m to help  odiers,  you, my friend.  I thank  you very  “*■ ‘*}® 'vork^Wch  you have  been  doing  for me all these  days  
that I haveheen  coming  .to you;  I also  observed  that  the work  did not 
make  you  feel too arrogant,  instead,  it was  humbling  you . God  knows  
what  you ^e > doing;  he would  not dare  throw  your  gold  before  a dog,  
neidier  will he dare put your  precious  stone  before  a pig; he who  
toows  h^ to make  use of opportunity  is the one whom.^d  gives  
the opportumty.  ®
"May^dgiveyoualengthyIife;mayGodgiveyoupea«ofmind;
may  the Creator  endow  you with  (good)  healdi.
8° place  from  where  I came;
" ® coming,  when  we shall  see ourselves
with  (our  own)  eyes."
^us  did the mm  say, and when  he ended  his speech,  I could  not 
see hun anymore.384
This is the ^tter,  you our people.  I believe  that since  you have  
been  reading  this book,  you have  not failed  to extract  some  wisdom  
for yourselves.  The elders  have  said that  other  people's  wisdom  does  
not allow  us to ^11an elder  a fool.385  He who  is in the world  without  
yVv animal  that is perished.  My mother  used  to
talk  to mose  of us who  are children  when  wte were  young  and  she told 
“k -M “y, 'He  who  has a child,  and the
child  IS not wise  is undertaking  a trade  with  a loss!
Do not  forget  that  the sweeter  the word  is, the more  its difficulties.
145






When  one experiences  difficulty  one time, it often  seems  as if one 
should  die. immediately.  If you  have  been  coming  across  difficulties,  
I want  you  to burst  into  lau^ter  and  know  that : a day  is coming,  when  
enjoyment,will  enter  to meet  you  in the house.  A school  ^Id  who  has 
not done  very  well  in an examination  today,  if he is very  active,  a day 
is coming  when  he will do well, and joy will cover  up the sorrow  
completely.  I want  all people  to know  that there  is no one who  does  
not  have  his own  forest  of God  to go in the world.  One's  Forest  of God  
is different  from the other's;  may God gr^t  that every  one would  
come  back  from  his own  Forest  of God  without  being  wounded.  May  
God  disallow  five difficulty  which  we would  not have  the capacity  to 
bear  to confront  us.
Do not forget  the words  which  you have heard  about  humility.  
Pride  is spreading  in the world  everyday,  and pride  is the root of 
destruction.  Irt whatever  position  you are in the world,  I want  you to 
put  on tihe attitude  of hunulity  like a gown.  The king  who  is big, does  
not compare  to a messenger  in the hands  of God  the (heavenly)  King.  
Do not forget  to deal with  people  with  integrity;  that  is, you should  
not wish  for evil  on  your  neighbour.  Let  your  yes  be yes, and  your  no 
be no But  righteousness  is not  an easy  thing,  for if you are not  well  
prepared,  it would  be difficult  to be righteous,  for as you are trying  to 
rescue  some  people  out of the pit, the one whom  you are trying  to 
rescue  rnight  be trying  to push  you  into the abyss.  But  if you continue  
with  your  integrity,  fire very  abyss  into which  he wants,  to push  you ; 
is the place  in which  he will find  himself,  and  he wiU fill it to the brim. ' 
If you use (your)  integrity,  God will stand by you-like,  a great  
mountain,  and  he who  runs  against  you Will be wounded.  Take  care 
of your  jobs,  (for)  what  is important  is the place  where  one  gets  one's  
morsel
It is against  the plan  of God,  and  it is abominable  in the si^t  of the 
children  of the world,  that  the child  whom  we begat  from  wnthin  our 
womb,  should  have  a careless  attitude  toward%ns.  TTietefore,  there  Is 
not any kind  of attitude  that the school  Children  can show  which  is 
more  (dignifying)  than tire attitude  of humility  before  fire eldfers  — 
respect  for the parents  and submission  to the ordinance  of God, fire 
(heavenly)  King.  I want  a child  who  knows  that  he is behaving  in such  
a w^y  that  makes  the par^ts  angry,  who  frightens  the teachers,  who  
saddens  the relatives,  to resolve  to forsake  such  attitude  on the day  he 
r^ads  this book,  for the sake of the future.  I think  it was one of the 
learned  of old that  had told us in a book  the other  day, that, 'A child  
who  behaves  carelessly  towards  his’parents,  an AkAIamagbo^®®  bird 
would  extract  his eyes  and  eat! May  God  forbid  an AkMdmagbd  bird 
to extract  and eat,  fire eyes  of our school  children.
You children  of men,  the world  is moving;  eyery  day is taking  a day 
out  of the days  of everyone,  and  the days  of fire  jife of tire children  of men  
are very  short.  Whatever  time  we have  in tire world,  I appeal  to you,  let
.146






US spend  it very  well; let us spend  it with  joy; let us spend  it with  
“yl let us cover  up (our)  sorrow  completely  with  happiness  
Thus  ends  this story.  I greet  all of you for the days  gone  by. May  
God  take  care  of your  homes  for you;  may  He take care  of your  paths  
as well.  He who is looking  for money,  may Gad give  him profitable  
looking  for a child,  may God give  him a peaceful  
1J J 1 ° looJ^iog  for a job, may  God,  provide  a good  job that 
K PossessoiHjf-the-sea-of-
, gifts help the nursing  mother  to take care of 0ier) child,  may He 
provide  good husband  for the maid, and give the young  man a 
peaceful  wife.  This  girl who  does  not  want  to have  a husband  and the 
young  hian who does  not want  to have  a wife,  may  God give them  
good  lives.  May  He bring  friendship  among  the rivals,-^®?  may  He give 
fertile  soil to the farmer,  and  give  those  who  do other  (kinds)  of work  
good  jobs to do; may  He give  health  to the sick,  and give wisdom  to 
the kings;  may  He give  understanding  to the chiefs,  and  may  He give 
knowledge  to the school  children,  and may He take care of toeir  
tochers;  may  He continue  to direct  die powerful  ones  to the path  of 
the truth.
Good  bye for now.
May  God  grant  that  we will continue  to hear  from  each  other.
D.O.  FAGUNWA.
147






Notes
1 The world's  rich man.
2. koko-eliibg  is an associative  construction  (the pot of yam flower  
eliibg  is flour obtained  from the kind of yams  botanically  known  as 
dioscurea  rotunda.
3. Palm  oil is obtained  from  palm  fruit  found  mostly  irt file southern  part 
of Nigeria.  Fagunwa  likens  the dusty road to the palm oil here.  
However,  the rusty  brown  colour  would  have  been  more  appropriate  
to describe  the dirt road  that he is tadking  about  in this  narrative,  but I 
have kept his simile  in order  to preserve  the flow of his style and 
thought  as much  as possible.
4. Sparrow-like-bird,  but  little  bigger  than  sparrow;  it is red featheredand  
is found  mostly  in the western  part  of Africa.
5. This  is certainly  a hyperbolic  expression.  Fagunwa  sometimes  does  that 
to achieve  parallelism  in this case,  between  "cry"  and "speaking".
6. This  part  of the  narrative  is autobiographical.  Resell  (Recheal)  Osunyomi  
was the name  of t).O. Fagunwa's  mother.  See Ayo Bamgbose,  77je 
Novels  of D.O.  Fagunwa  (Benin  City:  Ethiope  Publishing  Corporation,
7. The word translated  "crossroads"  here is orfta, which  is "T"  
intersection.  Literally,  it is a spot  where  three  roads  or paths  intersect.  
Y oruba  people  believe  tjiat orfta  is the meeting  spot of the spirits  and 
ghosts.  Sacrifices  are being  taken  there  either  to invoke  a good  spirit  for 
certain  help  needed,  such as prayer  for the gift of a child,  weaSh,  etc., 
or the bad  spirit  appeased  in case  of illness,  or some  diseases  associated  
with the power  of the vicious  spirit.  Therefore,  for one to lake his 
sacrifice  beyond  orfta  is to go out qf one's  expected  boundary,  hence  
here  a grievous  mistake.  The idea  is thus  proverbially  employed  hwe.
8. elubg,  yam-flour,  like mashed  potato,  is normally  prepared  with  
boiling  water.  This metaphor  simply  portrays  the complexity  yf the 
narrator's  dilemma  here.  It means  that  everything  is di^ointed  and  out 
of place:  a complete  disorder  withinhis  psyche  as reflected  around  hiih.
9. g^rd  is a substance  like cream  of wheat,  obtained  from  cassava,  which  
is a type  of tuber  mostly  found  in Nigeria  and  most  parts  of West  Africa.
10. This  is a reference  to Fagunwa's  first  volume  entitled  dgbdju  Odenfnd  
Igbo  Irunmgle,  translated  by Soyinka  as The Forest  of  A Thousand  
Demons:  A Hunter's  Saga,  published  by Nelson,  London,  in 1968.
11. The forest that is referred  to here is the setting  of file first novel  
mentioned  in note No. 10. It is inhabited  by ghosts  and all kinds  of 
spirits.  This  is a way of. tying  his second  sequel  (The  Forest  of  God)  to 
tire first  novel.
12. Orfki  is an  attributive  family  name . It is not  what  we can  call  a nickname  
— in Yoruba  — it goes deeper,  than  fltat. It has a very  strong  
rhetorical  important.  As a matter  of fact, it constitutes  a greater  part  of 
Yoruba  poetiy  known  as ijdld, Ewi  or Rira,  or a prosaic  history  of a 
family's  heroic  deeds.  This,  in classical  rhetoric,  is tmownas  epideictic
148






Edxvard  P.J. Corbett,  C/ass/ca/yZh^fohc  ' 
5&c/ent  (Second  edn.  ako R.C.  Abraham  Dictionary  of 
(London:  University  of London  Press  Ltd, (1958}  p 
defines  o^'as  "... an attributive  name  expressing  what  
the child  is or what  it is hoped  that it will become.  In a male,  thl orifo'  
coyotes  s^e^mg  heroic,  while  in a female,  it connotes  praise  or 
(mdearm^t.  Also, S.A. Babalola,  in his 77ie Content  and Form of 
(London:  Oxford  University  .Press,  1966),  pp. 142-143  
translates  orfh  as "salute."  Thus,  it is important  to note  that orfki  is a 
very  important  and  meaningful  part  of Yoruba  culture.
^er “'^‘apLorical  expression;  it means,  "I am still as strong  as
18.
19.
• 20.14. Ifa IS a God of divination,  and its devotee  is known  as Babalawo  He 
®^^a»a^^hist  or soothsayer  by consulting/te  oracle,-he  is alsoanative  
d^tor,  who  ^s  diseases  by the use of herbs  and his mystical  power  
/te IS one of the most  important  forms  of African  traditional  religion
discussion  on Ifa in his Olodu^re;
God  In Yoruba  Belief,  London:  Oxford  University  Press,  1962.
15. is made  out of com;  it is in the form  of jelly,  but a little bit more
16. ^e Yoruba  people  as well as most  Africans  believe  that the witches
live m a viaous  world  and are oblivious  to what  k going  oXti. “ 
visible  world.  Thus,  their  hearts  are changed,  and their minds  have  
an™l^^°V^  restricted  my moral  and ethical  codes  oft V i any  more.  Thus  it is not out of the ordinary  for them  to
the narrative  portrays  here.  Thus,  the narrative  here  
® k However,  traditionally)  lyd mi bsdr^ng^
could  ako  be positive  influences  as well.  °
■ fcSrSu*  things  simultaneously;
ftat  IS, as ttiejMdren  were  growirigup,  die father  was  thinking  about  
«^‘i®*®tand  the important  things  in life, siich  as the 
i^ationship  ^tw^  a man  and  a woman  in terms  of the philosophical  
the verse  that  follows  is all about.  , /'“"‘’°P™cai
h^«  f of Jagunwa's  epigraminatic  diction.  The intenHon
he seeks to impress  the basic ideals of 
marned  life on the reader,  flie yoimg  reader.^
is a rake-like  substance  made  out of black-eyes  peas-  it is 
taken  along  wth e^owhich,  asmenHonedhere,k  a little  diff^t  from  
the one de^bed  m note  #15; it is a little  pasty  rather  than  solid,  but it 
is made  out of the same  ingredients.
tX^ire ® metaphorical  sense  here.  Literally,  it means  'T wiU 
yotir  commg  in, your  going  out, your  all in all." In other  words,  the wfe  decl^  herself  as the steward  ofall that  her husband  
.claims  as his .own.  This is an indirect  didactic  aspect  of Fagunwa's  
• ® Yoruba  culture  is supposed  to be a good  sfevard,^d a dependable  caretaker  of all domestic  affairs.
2i : It is not a^t  the mores  in Yoruba  cultime  for a man  fo praise  himself  
or boast  to be a strong  man,/especially  in the presence  of i woman.
149






22. The Forest  of God.
23. Fagunwa  is a nomenclaturist:  he assigns  names  to his characters  in 
consonance  with  their  roles  in the story.  <^o2a-fZ>thumeans  an "angered  
python."
24. The word  "elders"  connotes  the idea of witchcraft.  Thus  it stands ’for 
witches  and wizards.
25. A type of men's  wear with large sleeves  made  out of hand-woven  
materials.  It is a very  expensive  material  worn  on  notable  occasions  (see 
Abraham,  p. 126).
26. . FagunWa's  epigrammatic  style  is comparable  to that of Thoreau  in his
Widden,  where  he advises  his reader  to build  his castle  in the air, that . 
is where  it ought  to be only  he should  strive  to build  a foundation  under  
it. Se^  Walden,  p. 221.
■ 27. Literally,  "Masquerade  from  Egi."
28. This  bird  belongs  to the cuckoo  family  of birds.
29. A species  of woodcock,  see note  No. 4.
30. i.e.,  aerial  of roots  and  plants.  (See  R.C.  Abraham  Dictionary  of Modem  . 
Yoruba.  London:  University  of London  Press  Ltd.,  1958),  p. 325.
31. Meaning  little-devil-outside.
32. "Moon",  a figurative  language  for ringworm.
33. Another  name  for a tiny gourd  of medicine.
34. A shilling  is a British  coin (the local  equivalent  then  in use).
35. Note  that  Fagunwa  is now  using  both  Biblical  and  Miltonic  concepts  in 
his narraitives.  Compare  Isaiah  14:12-15  with  Paradise  Lost.  1,1138-47.
36 His use of heaven  here does  not mean.paradise;  it means  that  fellow  is 
no more  iri existence;  he is dead.  When  one is dead  in Yoruba  culture,  
he is said to have  gone  to heaven,  the opposite  of earth.  The  term  is not 
judgmental,  thus it does  not have  anything  to do with  hell or heaven'  
or paradise.
37. The  word  translated  "maker"  here  is orf, which  literally  means  "head".  
Head  in Yoruba  culture  means  more  ^han  just human  head;  it has a 
philosophical  connotation  as well:  it is the creator  which  has  led  you  in 
to the world  and was  your  guidance  through  life. The word  "rnaker"  
then  properly  conveys  the idea.
38. Alddd-igbo  means  the "owner  of the crown  of the forest."
39. It is file belief  of Christians  that he who uses or solely  depends  on 
magical  power  through  the use of juju  would  never  prosper,  because  
he works  with  the  devil  whose  paths  are  paths  of darkness  and  spiritual  
poverty;  hence  making  him d^titute.
40. ^6 is a diffictilt  .word  to translate  completely.  It indicates  a contemp ­
tuous  attitqde  towards  a person,  who  is obviously  excruciating.  When  
this sound  is made  in seven-fold  (fine  literal  translation  of sfg  re l^eje},  
it shows  how much  the person,  or the character  deteste  the gnome.  
Wheriever  this sound  is made  to a person  in fine Yor^iba  culture,  if' 
means  that that  person  is worthless.
150






41.
44.
45.
51.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.49.
50.42.
43.
46.
47.
48.In other  words,  a person  from.another  planet  with an extraordinary  
power;  this  is suggestive  of Olowo-aiye's  extraordinary  poWer  as well.  
Ogun  here  means:  juju,  magical  power,  or charm.
Alakoso  literaDy  means  co-ordinator,  however,  this would  not 
communicate  effectively  in English  idiom,  hence  my  choice  of the word  
originator.  The idea  of singing  here  is the use of die flute  to sing  about  
God being  the one who enables  one to achieve  victory  over one's  
enemy.
■^is  is Fagunwa's  epigrammatic  way of saying  that a villain  does  not 
ihrive  for long;  his life is short,  and his end is unpleasant.
Traditionally,  Kings. ^d Chiefs  (Ijoye)  always  own their own  
trumpets  with  which  selected  skillful  trurnpeters  play  epldeictic  songs  
for them.  Olowo-aiye's  flute  is comparable  to that type  of trumpet.'  
Qmp-ardzy^literally  means  the children  of the world.
Some  African  bananas  are red.
Nigeria  was  still  using  pound  sterling  when  this.work  was  written;  this 
was  in use until  1972.
They  all lit up their  pretty  flowery  buds.
Most  Yoruba  women  paralinguistically  express  dissatisfaction  and 
frustration  by clapping  their  hands  at intervals  when  they  are worried  
about  something.
d si dabf  6 ti wp il6 gkg  literally  means  she looked  as if she had
^tered  into her husband's  house.  However  it is better  translated  
idiomatically  as the above.  A girl is suppose^  to be grown  and be 
matured  before  she gets  married  in Yoruba  culture.
52. As white  as snow;  some  Nigerian  com  is very  white  indeed.
A/^ary^could  also mean  sophistication.  However,  since  semantically  
it carries  a perjorative  meaning,  the word "waywardness"  better  
captures  the intention  of the author.
Qmg  ardiydcan  also  be translated  communicative^  as "man".  I prefer  
the literal  translation  "child  of the world"  in order  to be in tune with  
Fagunwa's  narrative  style  here.  In other  words,  ftie emotional  depth  of the 
subjunctive  mood  here  is preserved  by giving  it such  a literid  tarnation.  
Ajgdiran  (aje-dwran)  literally  means  witch-becomes-generation.  
Idiomatically  expressed,  one would  say witchcraft  runs-in-the-family.  
It is a comihon  thing  in most  African  cultures  to think  that  someone  is 
responsible  for the other  person's  death  through  tire use of witchcraft;  
So, Fagunwa  is being  both  realistic  as well  as satiric  here.
Qmg.  araiye  literally  means  the children  of the world,  but is both  
semantically  and communicatively  acceptable  to render  it as "the 
people."
In Yoruba  culture,  as it is probably  true of most  African  cultures,  a 
woman  does  not propose  to a man.
That  is, it does  not make  any difference  at all; in other  words,  "what  
difference  does  it make,  if a man  or a woman  makes  the first  move?"
151






60. B^^ot  badle  also  means  the  head  of the  house.  In most  African  cultures,  
especially  in Yoruba  culture,  tine oldest  man of the house  is always  
made  the head  of the house  or compound  where  several  families  live. 
He then  rules  like an important  official  until  his death.
61. The King  of Igbo  Olodumare  performed  the marriage  ceremony.
62. i.e., magical,  or diabolic  medicine.
63. O16ntn  Oba  literally  means  the owner-of-heaven  the King;  or God  the ^g.
64. Here we see Fagunwa's  religious  belief  which  filters through  his 
narrative:  God's  providence  is recognised  in whatever  successful  
condition  that  his hero  finds  himself.  He gives  the credit  to God,  not to 
his (the hero's)  super-diabolic  power.  It is true even in the world  
inhabited  by the gnome  and satanic  spirits.
65. Anjonnu-iberu  means  dreadful-gnome.
66. This is Fagunwa'e  so-called  weakness:  he has been  accused  of being  
deliberately  didactic,  in most  cases,  very  preachy.  His  catalogue  of sins 
here  is almost  directly  taken  from  Galatians  5:19-21.
67. A yellow-like  substance,  made  out of com-meal.  It is a very  light  food,  
mostly  taken  at dinner  time.  It is wrapped  with  special  kind  of leaves  
in units.
68. In other  words,  fids  proverb  can  be interpreted  as "a young  fellow  who  
knows  how to conduct  or behave  himself,  would  enjoy  the company  
and the wisdom  of file elderly  people."  It also reflects  an Andean  
gerontological  concept:  the elderly  people  are sden  as precious  sources  
of wisdom,  and are petceived  as the exemplaries  in moral  and ethical  
matters.  Thus  elderly  people  are the most  respectable  people  in the 
society.  Therefore,  to be found  in the midst  of the elderly  people,  is a 
sort  of privilege  and a sign  of maturity  on the part  of the youngpeople.
69. j^hin  gla literally  means  at the back  of tomorrow;  semantically  it means  
"in the future".
70. Olowo-aiye's  new  wife,  and the sister  of the one who  gives  some  fruit  
to Olowo-aiye.
71. The Forest  of God.
72. Tobi  is apron-like  material  u^d as an underwear  by some  Yoruba  
women,  especially  the uneducated  ones.
73. This  is simply  indicative  of how  strong  he became  after  using  the magic  
oil.
74. Or in a better  simile,  his eyes  were  as wild  as those  of a hungry  lion.
75. Or simply,  "my friend  ..."
76. Efun  is a white  lime,  while  osun  is also  a pink  substance  from  a kind  of 
wood.  When  mixed  with  water,  it serves  as a lotion.
77. This is a proverbial  phrase  which  means  a lunatic  or maniac  deserves  
nothing  but a beating  with  club.
. 78. This  is a proverbial  expression  which  means  that  when  one  is depressed  
by a terrible  affliction,  lesser  troubles  find their  ways  into one's  mind,  
thereby  perpetuating  one's  affliction  and downward  slide.
A52 ■






79. Literally,  "words  are in the eyes."
80. "Walk"  here  is a metaphor  from  all immoral  and  unethical  behaviours  
of men.
81. A wiWis  a fruit  resembling  walnut  or tetracarpidium  conophortn.
82. Fagunwa  is heavy4iandedly  didactic  here.  He believes  that  literary  art
should  both  please  and  instruct.  !
83. Qmg  enia  also  means  "man"  in the generic  sense.
84. Fagunwa  certainly  demonstrates  his surgical  insight  into  human  nature  
here/  as is true  in all of  his novels.  In a very  artistic  fashion,  he describes  
a psychological  instrument  known  as "defense  mechanism"  which  
man  uses to save  his face when  he is caught  doing  something  that is 
unethical.
85. This  is a proverbial  expression,  which  literally  means  that a lunatic  is 
good for nothing  but a beating  with a club on the back; that is, 
Olowo-aiye  does  not  have  any  choice:  he has to figjit  hiS way  through.
86. Akejiis  untranslateable  completely  within  this  context,  but  it means  an 
eternal  death  — semantically.
87. Literally,  "as the story  told  us."
88. Wijn ti so g I6rukg  literally  means,  "They  have  given  him  a name,"  an 
expression  which  means  that he has been marked  or named  as a 
notorious  person  by his peers.
89. This is one element  of narrative  complexify  in Fagunwa's  novels:  he 
digresses  and gets carried  away  with  embellishment  so much  that  he 
almost  loses  the reader  before  he comes  back  to the main  story.
90. Okgkojugkglg  literally  means  "husband  is not  bigger  than  husband"  
drat is to say, "your  husband  is not bigger  or better  than  mine'  if you 
feed  your  husband,  I can feed  mine,  too."
91. Fagunwa's  didacticism  is heightened  to the level of sermonisation  in 
this  paragraph;Lt  is also  anothCT  narrative  embellishment  which  always  
interrupts  the continuous  flow  of his narratives.
92. nkan  is better  translated  "beings"  here instead  of the literal  meaning  
"things".
93. gangan  is a native  talking  drum.
94. The Yoruba  and Nupe people  use a talking  drum to praise  local,  
regional  or national  heroes  very much.  This art is a powerful  
psychological  tool for motivation  in those  cultures.
95. Akdwediran  mean  "literacy  runs  in the family."  Literally  translated,  it 
means  "letter-writing-runs  in the generation."
96. That  is, dash  him against  die peak  of the rock.
97. Fairy  and  gnome  are used  interchangeably  for the purpose  of rhythm  
— my own  liberty .
98. This  is a type  of epideictic  or praise  song  for which  die talking  drum  is 
used.  It is ^ways  inspiring.
99. Here  again,  we see Fagunwa's  didacticism  heightened  to die level  of 
epigrammatism  and allegory.  The figh^  symbolises  die complexity  of
153






human  existence  as well as the power  of  endurance  that life calls  for; 
and in the end, there is always  a peaceful  and rewarding  rest after  
labour  with  attendant  material  that  persistent  perseverance  yields.
100. Omgliikbi  literally  means  gmg-ti-Niia-b(  "the child  begat  by Noa."  
Noa here,  according  to the Judeo-Christian  concept,  is the symbol  of 
righteousness,  and  the  embodiment  of  human  virtue.  Thus,  anyone  that 
portrays  any good  quality  is said to be the child  of Noa.  However,  for 
want  of a better  term  in English,  the word  gentleman/woman  is used  
as the Yoruba  equivalence  of gmgluabi.
101. i.e., having  less  and less respect  for his authority  and power.
102. Igb6  Inlnmgle  means  "The  Forest  of Four  Thousand  Daemons."  This  
is the setting  of the first  sequel,  Ogbojii  Ode.  The  translation  of the title 
is by Wole  Soyinka,  who rendered  the novel  into English  and had it 
published  by Nelson  in London,  1968.
103. Obviously,  this  is a narrative  contradiction.  It might  be a faulty  sentence
structure.  Based  on what follows,  however,  we can reconstruct  the 
sentence  to read: Boys  yio  ata ya g lenu  pe iba ohun ti nwgn  se fun 
baba  mi  mg  ni eyi — oyekio  ya g lenu  nitotg,  toripe  nwgn  seju  be Ig. 
"Perhaps  you  are surprised  lhat  that  was  all they  did  for  my  fafiier yro 
should  truly  be surprised,  if that  were  to be true —but actually  did
more  flaan  that."
104. Org pa esi ye literally  means,  "word  killed  and devoured  a response."  
That  is to say that the visitors  were  taken  aback  by the couple  and  by 
the splendour  of the palace  of the king  of Igbo  Olodumare.
105. Or beyond  description.
106. This  is a sign  of respect  of a king  by his subject.
107. By what  method  did you kill him?  "Or how did you  get him  killed?"
108. Or mankind.
109. See note  No. 9 for description.  This substance  is soaked  in cold  water,  
with or without  sugar.  It quenches  thirst  as well as fills the stomach.  
For a younger  learning  a trade  on the basis  of indentuite,  this could  be 
a luxury.  So it could  be out of his reach  financially  at times.  In Nigerian  
systems,  when  someone  is learning  a trade,  he is almost  like a servant  
to the master  who  teaches  that  trade.  The  master  charges  for the tuition  
and, in some  cases,  for room  and board.  This endeavour  can be very  
tedious,  and physically,  mentally  and psychologically  difficult  for the 
learner  under  such a system;  depencflng  on the kind of master  the 
learner  is working  for;  it thus  calls  for  absolute  endurance,  perseverance  
and long-suffering.
110. See note  No. 15; in this  case,  however,  e/rprefers  to a liquid  type,  which  
is consumed  with  spoon.  The piginised  English  term  for it is pap
111 . Literally,  "give  a wife  to Akowediran's  child."
112. Food  made  out of yam-flour.  See note  No. 8.
113. See note  No. 15.
114. Spinach-like  herb  used  for food.
115. jR^<^is  a special  drum,  which  is like a bongo  about  1 metre  long,  'with  
154






the top narrower  than the base; it is usually  used for S^g6  and 
egungun  (god  of iron,  and masquerade)  festivals.
116. is made  of large gourd  with cowries  woven  around  it — a 
musical  mstrument.
117. A musical  instrument  made  of a plywood  box (about  12" x 18" x 3"). A 
hole is cut on the top cover  like a guitar  box, except  that instead  of 
strings  across  the hold  like a guitar,  pieces  of metal-belt  are used.  The 
metal  belts  are  graduated  in tone  to produce  varieties  of tones.  It is used  
in juju  music  as well  as ipMk,  a Yoruba  traditional  music.  Note  also  that 
the word  jiyu  here  is not a medicine,  but a name  given  to that  kind  of 
music  because  of the way  it sounds  when  it is played.
118. dsanyin  is a kind of gSBirffir.  In traditional  African  religion,  it is 
conceived  as having  psychic  power.  Thus  its spirit  is invoked  through  
a little  god  in the comer  of medicine  man's  room,  to foretell  the future,  
and solve  any mythical  and domestic  problems.  It is invoked  through  
ventroliqual  trick.
119. - ^ola-ibmu  literally  means  "the  python  of fury."
120. A tiny gourd  of medicine.
121. E 616 literally  means  that  you'll  be old and  will  remain  strai^t  without  
a bent  back —in other  words,  your  health  would  last  throu^  your  old
. age.
'122. Here  Fagunwa  alludes  to Matthew  25:31-40.
123. See Note  No. 8 on yam.
124. is a handwoven  fabric  which  is very  expensive  and is used  on 
special  occasions  and  festivals  like marriages,  naming  ceremonies  and 
festivals  like Christmas  and other  Moslem  festivals.
125. Fagunwa's  extended  metaphor  here  serves  to intensify  the idea  that  the 
thing has done good things  to the one who both appreciates  and
, deserves  (by the virtue  of his personality)  such  a gesture.
126. Ipo literally  means  place;  metaphorically,  however,  it means  'horjour"  
or "respect"  as used  here.
127. This  is the basic  ideal  in Yoruba  culture:  the young  one should  listen  to 
the adult, and must, as much as possible,  not disregard  his/her  
injunction  or suggestion.  It is assumed  that  the grown-ups,  having  been  
in the world  much  longer  than  the young  ones,  have  been  schooled  by 
life, and  have  attained  a level  of wisdom  (through  varied  experiences  
in life),  which  elevates  them  beyond  the level  of the young  ones.  Thus,  
in Yoruba  and  mostly  in African  philosophy,  life is a school:  the longer  
you live,  the better  and the wiser  you  become.  Thus,  an elderly  person  
has  been  to the school  of life, and  has graduated;  thus  life in general  has 
invested  an authority  in him: he is therefore  qualified  to guide  the 
young  ones.
128. It's found  to be delicious.
129. "My darling."
130. This is Fagunwa's  allegorical  pattern:  the animals  in his world  are 
personified.
155






131. Q16)g  oni,  "meaning  the owner  of this  day,"  is another  phrase-name  for 
God.  He prays  for tfte antelope  that  God should  always  grant  him the
speech,  i.e., it will  always  be permitted  to speak  like  human
132. F^^is  a form  of greeting  in Yoruba;  literally,  it means  "be gentle"  or
come  gently".  °
133. or cow-itch.
134. In o^er  words,  he who  does  not discuss  his.problems  with  people  who  
-could  stretch  out helping  hands,  to him would  suffer  alone  — from  
heart-breaking  problems  in life. It is thus true, that "a problem  
discussed  with  a friend  is half-solved^'**  as the saying  goes.
135. This  is a didactic  means  of warning  the reader  against  keeping  one*s  
Sn  h 1” without  bringing  it out  by discussing  it with  those  who
136. Head  is comidere^o  be a person*s  god,  so, he prays  fliat  Olowo-aive*s
head  should  help  him down.  ' ■*
137. There  wasn't  anything  that I could  do.
138. There  is a textual  problem  here:  the line which  reads  **... tiiwo  ba 
lojj  igi' (^d  you per.*  delicately  on the tree)  should  read '.. ti ko ba
alight  delicately  on the tree) . Iwo should  readmo (1).
139. A deceptive  individual  says  one thing,  when  he means  the other.
140. That  is, "so many  people  have  done  the exact  stupid  thing  which  you
have  done  now.**  ° '
141. The word  dsthf  literally  means  '*secref*,  but that would  not carry  the 
meaning  of its usa^  in this  context.  As it is used  here,  dsirfmeans  one*s  
which  include^  one's  means  of livelilnood,  what  one eats,  
^d  how  one  gets  one*s  food,  sustains  the family,  health  aneteverything  
u expose  to others.  In Yoruba  culture,  it is
believed  tiiat  it is Only  God  who  canhelp  you  keep  those  things  without  
havmg  the need  to expose  yourself,  as long  as He continues  to provide  
for your  needs.
1^. O16nm  literally  means  the "Owner  of Heaven**  or the **Supreme  
Being**.
143. In ofiier  words,  it would  be tragic.
144. pus  is a fruit botanically  known  as tetracarpidium  gonophorum  or a 
"climber**;  it resembles  a walnut;  see Abraham,  p. 83; A Dictionary  of 
the Yoruba  Language  (Jbadam  University  Press  Limited,  1982),  p. 50.
145. Thus  far this is the only  place  where  Ihave  taken  the liberty  to translate
with parallel  meaning  (approximation)  rather  than what I call 
commurecosemantic  translation.  Kinma  baorglgbfile  bfenf  literally  
T®^*  SO 'vith  words  (endlessly)  like the ground  ahd
the mat.**  This  simply  means,  "to cut that  long  story  short.**
ax'® translated  **pond**  here  is omi  which  literally  means  water.  
My choice  of the word **pond**  is propelled  by the demand  of the
156 ,






English  idioiti  that seems  to communicate  the idea  better  than  "water".
148. The word  agbalagb^, "elder",  as used  here,  is not pejorative:  it simply  
means  the elderly  ones  who  are full of wisdom  about  life.
T49. "My  intelligence  was  higher  than  that of animal,"  in other  words.
150. In other  words,  God  is always  capable  of providing  for His own.
151. id^kerbr^bde means,  literally,  "the silence  of the outside."
152. Literally,  Ko sialaSa  fiin mi means  "there  was  no peace  for me."
153. Pupa*literally  means  red. However,  I chose "yellow"  because  it is 
likened  to gold;  ancf  gold  in English  is generally  known  to be yellow,  
not red.
154. Again,  funfun,  means  "white",  but since  the object  of comparison  is 
silver,  I had to choose  "bright"  instead  of white. .
155. ' See Exodus  20. Notice  his rhetorical  prowess  as he uses parallelism  at
die beginning  of this'paragraph.
156. i.e. over  his pate.
157. This  means  he has fumbled;  he has made  a great  mistake!
158. That is "do not forget  to speak  the truth always,  and in aU circum ­
stances,  it should  always  be within  you, for it is stronger  than any 
magical  power  (charm)."
159. The word  aseni-bani-ddro  is a compound  word  meaning  he who tries 
to undo  one and comes  round  to sympathise  with  one when  one is in 
pain  as a result  of his double-dealing.
160. In Yoruba  culture,  it is believed  that one's  in-laws  are like a lion who  
should  not be ill-treated  or taken lightly.  Instead,  they should  be 
respected  and loved whole-heartedly.  Thus, anything  that would  
tarnish  one's  image  before  them  shouldbe  eschewed.  This  relationship,  
of-course,  is reciprocative  between  the son-in-law  and the 
parents-in-law.  This  kind  of relationship  also  includes  all the members  
of the immediate  and distant  family  of the wife  too.
161. Here  again,  as usual,  we see a heavy-handed  didacticism  in Fagunwa's  
narrative.  The tone  here  is that  of an educator  who  seeks  to instruct  his 
students  on the ideals  of family  life in terms  of the responsibilities  on 
the parts  of both  parents  and children.
162. Fagunwa's  Judeo-Christian  concept  of life after  death  is in consonance  
with  his Yoruba  belief  that  there  is life on the other  side  after  death.  This  
is strongly  supported  by African  Traditional  Religion  as well.
163. This  echoes  the Biblical  narration  of the story  of Jesus  in the Garden  of 
Gethsemane.  See Matthew  25:36-46;  Mark 14:32-42;  Luke 22:39-46;  
John  18:1.
164. In other  words,  "I became  emotional,  too."
165. This is one of the most important  aspects  of Yoruba  culture  in 
particular,  and  an African  custom  in general:  when  a child  is grown  and 
becomes  a man  or woman,  he is obliged  to take very  good  care of his 
parents  in terms  of  housing,  clothing  and  food.  Our  elderly  ones  remain  
with  their  children,  not  in the "home  for the elderly",  they  always  enjoy  
the company  of the'ir children  and grandchildren.  This is the fruit of
157






172.
173.
178.
179.
180.
181.
182.169.
170.
171.
174.
175.
176.
177.their  labour,  and the crown  of their  old age.
166. See note  No. 8.
167. In Yoruba  culture,  when  an elderly  person  dies, after the burial,  the 
immediate  and the extended  family  come together  to have a big 
ceremony  in which  they provide  food of aU kinds  as well as music  of 
all sorts.  It is usually  an occasion  for celebration,  because  the deceased  
hadlivedtoaripe  age,  and  had  immortalised  himself  thrdu^posterity.  
It is a thing  of joy. However,  Fagunwa  discourages  this' unn^cessaiy  
extravagance,  and enjoins  his readers  to take  care  of their  parents  with  
the money  which  they  would  waste  after  their  parents'  death.
168. .Anin  literally  mea.s  "diselse".
This  is another  Miltonic  idea.  See Paradise  LostI,  11,40-49.
This  expression  means  "be ready  to ergoy  yourself  seriously."
See Psalm  121:5-8  Fagunwa  chooses  to turn  the passage  upside  down  
here  because  he is talking  about  a rebellion  against  the will  of God  here.  
Literally,  }f6riti  lebg  paeans  "perseverance  is sacrifice."
Baba-Omrungb^-y^uk^  means  "a father  with a bushy  beard"  or "a 
bushy-bearded-fathw."
That  is to say, "your  Jwsords  are right  Within  my heart."/
That  is to say, "My  eyes  mw  a lot of troubles."
That  is, one s mind ’is the architect  of one's  destiny."
The word translated  "favour"  is tijii which  literally  means  "be 
ashamed."  However,  for communicative  purpose,  it's better  translated  
"favour".
or a hat.
ed/literally  means  "man".
Literally,  gkin  is translated  "heart".  In English  idiom,  however,  "soul"  
better  expresses  the idea of being  in a relaxed  state.
i.e., like a shrub  by thp bank  of the river.
This  is a pun  here:  Fagunwa  sometimes  manipulates  the language  and 
makes  it serve  his humorous  purpose  in any context.  Thus  the word  
gbaphno  means  being  famous  or sophisticated,  semantically.  However,  
Fagunwa  uses the literal  meaning  here to say something  pn a'Super  
superlative  degree,  about Olowo-aiye's  good nature  and whole-  
^meness:  a way of giving  a very high recommendation  of 
• ® character  to (Mr.)  Death.  The literal  meaning,  therefore,
is "he-whom-  two-hundred-faces-know.  Igba is two hundred.  Thus  
Olowo-aiye  is not only known  by two hundred  faces,  but he is also 
known  by six thousand  faces!
183. The word translated  "ignored"  here is nani  which  in reality,  has a 
positive  meaning  in Yoruba:  It really  means  "care  about",  or "make  
much  ofi, but Fagunwa,  for one reason  or the other,  gives  it a negative  
meaning  in this context,  for he even  prays  that God should  not ndrd  
(ignore?)  us. I believe  that  tlxis  is a textual  problem,  which  needs  further  
exploration.  For the time being,  we may postulate  the fact that it is 
simply  misused  w^rile  we await  a closer  linguistic  clarification  on the 
158






basis of Fagunwa's  dialect.  Most  Yoruba  speakers,  however,  would  
give it a positive  meaning.  Another  conjecture  could  be in .the area of 
typographical  error,  i.e., instead  of naiu  the publisher  could  have  
cut the negative  prefix  sai  which  means  "nof ' and printed  nAnf.
184. See note  No. 24.
185. The expression  here  means,  "I have  disorganised  the life of a famous  
person."  The word translated  "load"  is eruy that is what it means  
literaly,  but semantically,  it has to do with  life as a whole,  the truth  of 
one's  .existence.
186. In other  words,  "I have killed  the sophisticated  one" who probably  
thought  that  he would  never  die,  for he thou^t  that  life would  go on 
for "ever".
187. Literally,  "I have  made  the children  of men  cry."
188. I£a is a god of divinations;  its priests  is a diviner  or sophist.  He is 
believed  to have  the power  to cast spell  on whoever  he wants  in order  
to make  them  suffer  in one way or the other.
189. This  statement  echoes  a Biblical  passage  found  in Psalm  115:5-7.
190. Fagunwa  echoes  Matthew  4:7 here.
191. See Exodus  20:5.  Fagunwa's  narrative  is replete  with  Biblical  allusions.
192. Medicine  here means  a kind of magical  power  through  which  he 
avenged  the wrong  done  him.
193. i.e., he became  insane.,
194. i.e., a good  person.
195. See Mark  13:7. It is clear  to any close  reader  of Fagunwa's  narratives,  
that  his thoughts  and  motives  are immersed  in religious  themes.  In fids 
case,  it is the theme  of Christ's  second  coming  as recorded  in Mark  13.
196. A vain  person.
197. This  is a heightened  moralisaticn  in Fagunwa's  narrative.
198. i.e., he was greedy.  I choose  to translate  literally  in order  to maintain  
Fagunwa's  parallelism  as he balances  hands  with  bossom.
199. See II Corinthians  6:14;  I Corinthians  5:9-10.  Fagunwa  implies  that  this
man  failed  to listeri  to God's  injunction  through  Christ,  hence  his  eternal  
damnation.  ' >
200. A piece  of broken  clay-pot.
201. Or a talebearer.
202. See Psalm  73.
203. i.e., they  abhored  his name  so much  that  they  did not want  to give  this 
same name  to their children,  for file fear that fiieir childi^n  might  
assume  such  woeful  character.
204. i.e., God  is not an unri^teous  Being.
205. See John  3:16. This is another  Miltonic  theme  in Paradise  LosPOl, 11, 
22-25,  echoed  in Fagunwa's  narratives:  he seeks  to justify  the Way of 
God  with  man.  This  character  is now  being  rewarded  for  his  evil  deeds,  
which  he had  done  while  he was  alive;  see also  Revelation  22:12  which  
talks  about  the final  reward  from  God  to man  according  to his deeds.
159






206. See Galatians  6:7.
207. Literally,  "I shall  not repeat  one thing  twice,"  thereby  saying  less than  
you  have  told me.
208. This  is another  example  of Fagunwa's"jumbled"  narrative:  he takes  off 
from where  Death  begins  a lengthy  response  to Baba-Otiiningbon-  
yeuke's  introduction  of Olowo-aiye  to, Death,  and digresses  to say all 
that Death  had spoken,  and that Olowo-aiye  had spoken  in response  
to Death's  long  speech.  In doing  so, he loses  track  of his narrative.  Thus  
he makes  Olowo-aiye  tell Death  th^t  he (Olowo-aiye)  would  be going  
home  to join  his friend  Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke,  who  is supposed  to 
be standing  right  there  with  him at die time  of his long  speech.
209. The sight  of the diabolic  things  in the creature's  house  creates  such a 
fear in him so much  that he begins  to feel that those  things  are right  
inside  of him,  below  his belly-button,  breathing  or throbbing.
21£L Le., 'call  me a bastard."
211. Sari  is a term  used  ior the food  which  Moslems  eat between  1 a.m.  and 
4 a.m. during  the month  of Ramadan,  the month  of fasting.  Moslems  
do not eatpork;  it is against  their  religious  teaching.  Therefore,  to have  
eaten  sari with  pork  is a serious  violation  of Islamic  religious  principles.  
That is how bad Olowo-aiye's  situation  is now, by what  
Baba-Onirungbon  is planning  to do to him.
212. A kola-nut  is mainly  grown  in southern  Nigerian,  but  the Hausas  in the 
North  eat it most.
213. See note No. 15 on ^p. This is a common  food among  the Yoruba  
people.
214. i.e., a gentleman  should  always  speak'the  truth.
215. Literally,  "the  matter  has gone  overhead."
216.
217. (5nifeojii  mpmi  literally,  "It was  making  face  at me."  See Amos  5:18-20.
218. This is true love;  the lover  does not know  why she/he  loves  her/his  
lover.
219. Literally,  "because  of the wisdom  in his head."
220. Or "yott  are going  to be my husband."  In Yoruba  culture,  a husband  is 
consider^  as the father  of the house,  hence  the term at baba  
which  literally  means  "the father  of the home."
221. Palm-wine  is a natural  wine,  which  is white  in colour;  it looks  like the 
water  in which  white  lime paint-brush  is washed.  It tastes  like sugar,  
but is highly  intoxicating.
222. Literally,  from  one to one.
223. In other  words,  be begged  for permission  from  the animals.
224. A more rigid translation  woulH  read "... that which  is in his own  
mouth."
225. i.e., power  to understand  the birds  and  the animals  when  they talked  
to each  other.
226. Literally,  "the  bottom  of the secret."
160






K more idiomatid  translation  would  read: 'As it is with most rich 
■ people. .
228. Fagunwa's  narrative  is unclear  here.  He asserts  that 'God  is powerful,'  
for example,  and follows-  the premise  by saying  that the intelligent  
people  are uncommon —those  who  have  money  and  still worship  God  
in their humility.  It is difficult  to relate  that to his premise:  'God is 
powerful'  or 'God  is mighty'.
229. In other  words,  he decided  to multiply  women  for himself — an act of 
polygamy  which  is not against  the more  or the culture  of the Africans  
— in fact it is a .part of it.'However,  Fagunwa,  standing  on the 
Judeo-Christian/Westem  platform,  tries  to indict  that  practice  here.
230. This extensive  similq describes  the way Yoruba  woman  dresses:  a 
typical  Yoruba  woman's  outfit  includes  y^, ir6, "wrapper",  biibi,  
"mini-bluse",  gele, "head-tie",  and iboriin  "shawl".  This outfit  
becomes  a metaphor  for the viciousness  of this woman.
231. Ina polygamous  home,  the first woman  of the house  is called  lyale  at
"literally  meaning  'mother  of the house'.  The one that follows  
is the lyaw6"v/\ie" .
232. Or "immediately  ..."
233. Or apron  worn  under  male's  trouser.
234. Three  pence  was 14 of one shilling  sterling,  the currency  in use in 
Nigeria  during  Fagunwa's  time.
235. Or mind.
236. In African  culture  in general,  and Yoruba  tradition  in particular,  it is 
the bridegroom  that  pays  the dowry  and  all kinds  of dues  as demanded  
by the custom  in the bride's  family.
237. Most  African  family  system  is patriarchal;  thus  the husband  is the head  
of the home.  This  is the meaning  of this  metaphorical  proverb.  The  wife
js expected  to listen  when  the husband  talks,  for he makes  the major  
decisiorfin  the family.
238. In other  words,  cut your  coat according  to your  cloth.
239. In other  words,  the position  of leadership .
240. i.e., according  to their  will.
241. Akasii  means  "a jumbo",  which  is the father  of the normal  size of pJtp,-  
see note  No. 15.
242. That  is, to show  off in order  to make  others  jealous.
243. i.e., "I was  not forced  or bothered  whenever  I did  not  have  any money  
to give  you."
244. Literally,  "since  the day we have  been  courting  each  ofiier."
245. A proverb  which  means  that  both  lovers  are  meant  for each  other.  Thus  
whenever  one goes  the other  one definitely  follows.
246. Euphemistic  expression  for death.
247. The imagery  here parallels  the process  of making  mashed  potatoes:  
when  the water  is boiling,  a handful  of mashed  potatoes  is put in; 
without  stirring  it very well,  the water  boils  and rises  and covers  the
161






handful  of mashed  potatoes.  That  is exactly  what  Fagunwa  thinks  love 
does  to lovers.
248. Fagunwa's  didacticism  in terms  of the caution  and carefulness  within  
the direction  of Cod  in the  choice  of partners  in marriage  emanates  from  
the Yoruba  culture.  Marriage  in that culture,  as is true  in mOst'  African  
cultures,  is one of the most  serious  things  that a man  and a woman  
undertake  in life. Thus  a lot of time  is spent  in the probing  of the family  
from  which  a young  girl and a young  man  choose  to marry.  They  are 
very much  concerned  about  compatibility  on all levels  of existence  
before  the marriage  could  be done.  Thus  divorce  is very  rare.
249. This  is a Yoruba  thought  pattern  in particular  and Grat of the Africans  
in general  concerning  the concept  of gerontology.  The Yoruba  people  
believe  that  the older  a man  gets  in the world,  the deeper  and wider  is 
his wisdom  and  experience;  hence  the elderly  people  are indispensable  
both  within  the family  and within  the society  as a whole.  Thus  the idea 
of die home  for die elderly  is not appealing  to the Yoruba  people;  they want  their  elderly  ones  to be with  them  and  enjoy  the rest of their  days  
with children  and grandchildren,  etc. That, to them,  is the joy of old 
age.
250. Here  again  is anodier  aspect  of Yoruba  culture  which  gives  a lot of 
respect  (sometimes  to the extent  of fear) to the elderly  people,  from  
whom  the young  ones  are supposed  to learn  things  about  life.
251. In other  words,  "... he isJooking  for trouble."
252. That  is, the adult  through  the experiences  and  wisdom  wrought  by age, 
knows  the deeper  things  of life than  the young  people.
253. Here  again,  according  to the mores  of the Africans  in general,  and that 
of the Yoruba  people  in particular,  wisdom,  on the part of )he young  
people,  lies in his recognition  of the adult's  place  in die world,  and his 
willingness  to acknowledge  it.
254. i.e., people's  ambition  in life should  be moderate  in order  to avoid  an 
undue  anxiety.
255. This  is a title  for diose  who  are making,  or have  made  pilgrimage  to Mecca.
256. Imam  is a Moslerr^priest.
257. The  Moslem  spiritual  leader  is called  Anal)?Muhammed.  Anabi means  
a messenger  or angel.  Thus  Muhammed  is conceived  by the Moslems  
as God's  Messenger.
258. In other  words,  "When  the children  of men  honoured  God."
259. Fagunwa  is apparently  Miltonic  here:  he describes  the hurling  of Satan  
out of heaven  as found  also in Milton's  Paradise  Lostl,  36-74;  see also 
Isaiah  14:12;  Jude,  1:6  . Fagunwa's  Judeo-Christian  theme  constitutes  a
■ single  thread  that  runs  through  his narratives.  He consistently  portrays  
God's  sovereignty  over the heaven  as well as the affairs  of men  in the 
world.  Man's  duty  therefore,  is to obey  him  and do his will.  This  is the 
only Way out of die grip of Satan  who  has been  hurled  out of heaven  
only  to disorganise  and deceive  God's  creation  here  in the world.
260. i.e., "She  was the one who  first  waved  at me."
261. That  is to say that  her cooking  is not too tasty.
162






262. Babaldwo  is an Ifa priest.
263". That  is to say that  he helped  him to become  somebody,  so to speak.
264. i.e., "My  salary  is not enough."  Fagunwa  picks  on the usual  complaint  
' of the teachers  all over the world:  they always  feel that they are
underpaid.
265. i.e., he is not smart  or clever.
266. For note  on g^,  see note  No. 9.
267. In other  words,  "help  me to find  a solution  to this problem."
268. Literally,  banana  does  not produce  child.
269. i.e., black-eyed  peas.
270. Ten pounds,  currency  then  in use in Fagunwa's  time.
271. That  means'that  the people  cast speU  on his life,  and  things  begin  to fall 
apart.  This is an explanation  to human  sufferings:  most of the time,  
other  people's  catastrophy  and downs  of life are blamed  on witches  and 
wizards.
. 272. The pronoun  nwon  third person  plural  "they"  is not grammatically  
consistent  with tine subject  of the sentence.  Thus the use of "they"  
would  make  it ambiguous.  Hence,  my choice  of "he"  for third  person  
singular.
273. This is an aspect  of Fagunwa's  concept  of theodicy:  he attempts  to 
justify  the goodness  of God in spite of the existence  of evil, which  
manifests  itself in various  modes,  such as sickness,  suffering  of all 
kinds,  catastrophies,  etc. in the world.  See van A. Harrey,  A Hand  of 
Theological  Terms:  Their  Meanings  and Background  (New York:  
Macmillan  Publishing  Co., 1964),  p. 236.
274. That  is, about  their  lack of beauty.
275. Literally,  ko mo iwe  means  "he did not know  book."
276. i .e., he did  not  respect  the elders  anymore . The  African  culture  dem^ds  
that the young  one, in whatever  position  he is in life — rich, poor,  
educated  or uneducated  — should  always  respect  the elders,  or 
Whoever  happens  to be older than he is. This is a sign of healthy  
personality  in African  culture,  and more so, in Yoruba  culture  in 
particular.
277. Or health.
278. Pound  sterling  (currency  then  in use in Fagunwa's  time).
279. One  tin is about  412 litres.
280. Fagunwa  laughs  at the ludicrous  in human  behaviour,  in his bid to 
justify  the way of God  in the affairs  of man.
281. Literally,  "... if you  are getting  ready  to go forward  ..."
282. This.is  directly  from  Psalm  115:4-6.
283. A strict  English  grammatical  construction  would  not allow  the verb  
"seen"  in this structure.  The right  verb would  be "heard"  as a verb  
which  appropriately  describes  what  the cock  does,  that  is, "say",  in the 
sentence.
163






284. In the African  culture,  the training  of a child is not confined  to the 
parents  alone;  it extends  to ^11 the relatives,  even  to the community  as 
well.  Thus  the training  of a cjuld  is a communal  effort  as well.
285. Note that this is the end of the narrator  within  the main  narrator's  
narratives:  Akara-ogun  is lhe main  narrator  whose  narration  has been  
taken  over  by Baba-Qnirungbon-yeuke.
286. Here AArpW  is appropriately  translated  "educated"  rather  than the 
literal  meaning  — "secretar^'  or "scribe"  for the sake of clarity  and 
intelligibility.
287. This could  be a dining  room,  or a kitchen. on/e  literally  means  "the 
house,  of food";  thus following  the context  of the.  narrative,  we can 
conclude  that  he really  means  the kitchen:  she was still cooking  when  
the girl came  in.
^88. I have  here  translated  the Yoruba  word  pele  with  a sentence  instead  of 
a single  word,  because  the context  calls  for such  situation  in which  the 
speaker  normally  sympathises  with  the character.  Ordinarily  used  as a 
greeting  word,  means  something  like "Hi"  in,American  truncated
greeting,  'how  are you?"  Literally  translated,  it means  "gently",  or "be 
carefol or watch  your  steps",  or when  it is used  for someone  who  is 
hurting,  it means I m sony";  thus, this word  means  a lot of things,  
depending  on how  and in what  context  it is used.
289. pie  phrase  "old,  old"  meaning  6gb616gl>ois  used  as an intensifier  here;  
it dc»s  not refer to the age of the character  (the woman)  in question.  
The "old,  old" £^Z>o7qgZ>oiritensifies  the woman's  power  as a witch.
290. Kneeling  down  whena  woman  is greetingher  husband,  settinghis  food  
before  him,  or handling  almost  anything  to him,  is a sign  of respect  that 
is expected  from  a woman  — this is part  of Yoruba  culture.
291. Igi is a wood  used to roof a house.  It is signiffcant  in the short  
incantation  because  of the symbol:  it symbolises  stillness  and  muteness,  
the position  and the condition  in which  the woman  wants  her  husband  
to be while  she is away  taking  care of her lustful  business.  This is an 
element  of what  I like to term  the truth  of fiction  which  permeates  the 
novels  of D.O. Fagunwa.  What  I mean  by the truth  of fiction  is this: 
though  the story  as told  by this character  is not true it is probable;  such  
a thing  is not uncommon  within  the cultural  experience  of the Africans  
or occultists  all over  the world.
292. The idea of kissing  as a romantic  element  here is foreign  to African  
culture . Fagunwa  obviously  picked  it up while  he was  in England . Thus  
he uses  it tfa embellish  his narrative.
293. Or "with  my matter,"  i.e., something  about  me.
294. See note  No. 56.
295. Literally,  al£si means  "he-who-is-no-more."
Naturally,  the African  king  marries  many  wives.
Literally,  "on the ground  of the earth."
The  kind  of cloth  referred  to here  js wrap-around,  or "wrapper"mainly  
used  by women.296.
297.
298.
’164






299. This  is a form  pf incantation,  magical  chant.  It is always  used  in different  ■ 
forms  and in different  length  and in various  occasions.
300. literally  means  .side;  however,  this could  be right  over  her busts.  
Egb^,  side,,  thus  becomes  a euphemistic  term  here.
301. This is Fagunwa's  peculiar  use of language  for the sake of rhetorical  
and artistic  effect.  Instead  of him using  the word  yin for the verb  
"shoot",  he uses  "stabbed".  This  is characteristic  of his narratives.
302. This  is a proverb  which  means  that if one engages  in a bad and  vicious  
action  in life, though  one might  succeed  every  time,  one day is coming  
when  one would  be caught  in one's  own  trap.  A thief  woxild  one day 
be caught  by the owner  of the stuff  one steals  everyday.
303. ij^inbaforiti  literally  means  ' 'accident  rests  its head
304. This short story within  the narrative  is inserted  to explain  the 
etymology  of this nomenclature,  Ijambaforiti.  The story  explains  the 
name.  See note  No. 303.
305. Enia-se-pele  literally  means  "person-be-gentle;"  or "a person-who-  
acts gently."  The former  is more on the target in Fagunwa's  
nomenclatural  system  for even  names  constitutes  a means  of teaching  
morals.  Fagunwa's  reader  is now  used  to his consistent  and persistent  
sermonizing  in his narratives.  Since  the first meaning  of the name  is 
more  in the imperative  mood,  it therefore  stands  to reason  to hold  on 
to it as Fagunwa's  intended  meaning  for the name.
306. This is a part of Yoruba  culture:  when  an elderly  person  dies, his 
children  celebrate  his death  and burial  by putting  up a big party,  
depending  on the social  status  of flxe children  and  that  of the deceased.  
Even if he did not have any children,  his nephews  or relatives  are 
expected  to do what  his children  woxild  have  done  for him  at his death;  
if the deceased  was very old before  his death,  and had many  children  
and grandchildren,  his/her  death  is celebrated  with great  pomp  and 
jubilation,'thanking  God for the deceased's  life, and  for the lives  of the 
children,  grandchildren  and the great,  grandchildren,  as the case may 
be.
307. Literally,  Lojv  miipeans  "in my eyes"  or "before  my eyes."
308. This  idea  emanates  from  Moslem  cxdture:  the religion  allows  or enjoins  
them  to give their daughters  away  to deserving  young  men as gifts.  
Fagxmwa  uses this material  to dramatize  the extraordinarily  good
• person  of this character  — Erxia-se-pele.  However,  the character's  
rejection  of the gifts is an indictment  on this kind  of practice.  It is thxis  
a demonstration  of the Christian  ideals  of family  life — to marry  for 
love  and to marry  only  one wife.
309. Sheep-monkey.  Fagxmwa  is a skillfxil  nomenclaturist:  he gives his 
characters  the names  that  match  their  roles  in his narratives.
310. Note  that ordd  here is used  to be in consonance  with the character's  
behaviour,  and  natural  inclination;  oriXiis  thxis  used  in a pejorative  way  
here.  See note  No. 12.
311. Oki is made from yam-flour,  and it is prepared  exactly  like 
mashed-potatoes:  with  boiling  water  except  that  it is made  to be a little  
more  solid  than  mashed  potatoes.  See note  No. 2.
165






312 A short loose  garment  terminating  at the waist,  worn  by men and 
women,  A Dfcbonaiy  of Yoruba  (Ibadan:  University  Press Limited  
1979),  p. 58.
313. A "ty^  of gown  for man:  it has  very  ample  sleeves  about  a foot  longer  
myi Are arms of the wearer:  it has many  pleats."  R.C. Abrah^
' • 1 of Modem  Yoruba  (London:  University  of London  Press,  
1958),  p. 58.
314. See note  No. 124.
315. Thatistosay,  "I did  not  greet  him  wholeheartedly,  therefore  my  words  
of grating  were  nasalized:  they  were  not dear.
316. £’wea'a2»platerally  means  " Leaf-blends-the-world-together."
317. Medicine  here  means  magical  medicine,  charms.
318. is translated  "deamon"  here, on the basis of Soyinka's
? O^6jd  QdeNfndlgbdlrdxunole,  Trans,
by Wole  Soyinka.  (London:  Nelson,  1968).
319„ Husband  here  means  "The  master  of them  all."
320. S/gid?  is m iirmge  made  from  mud  clay.  It is believed  to possess  diabolic  
power.  Thus  it could  avenge  and protect  its owner  .when  invoked.  It is 
LtT*^1^9)°^  214 Yoruba  (Ibadarr  University  Press
literally  means  "sorrow-down"  semantically  translated  
downward-sorrow."
322. Notice  &at Fagunwa,  here again,  becomes  plainly  didactic,  a basic  
mtent  of fus novd,  given  flie socio-religious  milieu  in which  he wrote.
323. This  is a sort  of sarcasm:  it means  'thanks  for eating  without  asking  me! '
324. = C^eliterally  means  "tine  owner  of tire  house,"  I have  taken  the liberty
of rendering  it as "host."
325. Ojola-ibfnu  means  "The  iyfl(on  of Anger."
326. The reptiles.
ZT! . Literallj^  apord  means  ^'poison-killer."
328. i.e., impressed  it uptjn  us.
329. Literally,  egiogris  translated:  "the  root  of tree,"  which  is the  same  tiling  
as the word  ogun  "medicine."
330. S^Rev.  21:1-5  for this river  injagery.
331. Meaning  that  he suffered  a lot.
332. i.e. the ghosts.
333. .Literally,  "through  the outside  of heaven."
334. l.e., palm  oil.
hanslated  "search"  here is the Yoruba  word wo which  
literally  m^ans  "look."  However,  the semiotics  and  the semantics  of the 
r context  strongly  suggest  the idea of search  instead  of 
"1 1 H ® Wefcase  or a purse,  but one does  not
look into a pocket.  One uses one's  hand  to Search  for something  in 
one s pocket;  hence  my rendering  of the word "search"  instead  of
166






"look"  in this context.
336. Fagunwa  echoes  the Palmist  here;  See Psalms  116:11,  and  Solomon  in 
Ecclessiastes  12:8.
337. Mo sebf, "I think"  or "I’suppose"  is a strange  phrase  in Yoruba,  it is 
strange  in tine sense  that it is often  employed  in tine context  where  a 
strong  belief  is expressed.  It is a poetic  diction  which  when  used  in
oi ewi or expresses  certainty  and authenticity.  "IjJi kan ija km ti 
WOT  ja I'Oft  nfle Oldlomi/mo  sebi sg'ii gbogbo  vfa. 16 se". "A certain  
Hg^t  that  was  fou^t  at Ofa  in Olalomi's  house,  I supposed  Vfas  fought  
in the presence  of aU".
338. This  is an allusion  to the story  of the  .ten lepers  in Luke  17:11 —17.
339. That  is to say, "we suffered  a lot on the way."
340. This-is  an expression  in Yoruba  which  expresses  how  much  one has 
been  engulfed  by fear.
341. A typical  Yoruba  native  pants  is tied  around  the  waist  by a string  whidr  
is passed  fluoug^  tiie string  hole  afound  the waist  band.  In tills case,  
few  has  made  this to untie  oy itself.  This  is Fagunwa's  sense  of  humour  
filtering  through  his narrative  style.
342. The sheep  of monkey..
343. This  is a metaf^orical  expression  v\diich  means  "Let's  not prolong  the 
story,"  or "to cut the long  story  short."
344. This  meaps  "Acddent-rest-its  head."
345. Notice  Fagunwa's  exaltations  of God  and His ahnightiness.
346. In Yoruba  language,  when  li^tning  and  thunder  roar,  it is said  that  the 
rain  roars.  Hotcc  the expression  (bjonku  "tile  rain  rqars."
2)^. For the idea  of enmity  between  man  and snakes;  see Gen.  3:15.
348. ie., tile grave.
349. The word  translated  "know"  here  is the Yoruba  word  riwhich  means  
"to see.".  However,  for the sake  of the intelligibility  of tiie narrative,  I 
have taken  the liberty  to render  it "know"  which,  of course,  is 
synonymous  to "pee"  as used  by Fagunwa  in tills controt.
350. For this part  of Fagunwa's  narrative,  see Daniel  3:15.
351. Or the "daemon,"  as Soyinka  renders  it in Ids translatian  of Ogboju  
Oieninu  Igbo  Inmmole.  See  also.  Abraham,  p. 307.
352. i.e., "call  me an illegitimate  child."
353. One  of ttie lesser  gods  trf flie god of divination.
354. poison-killer  is rendered  as "antidote"  in otiier  places  in this 
translation.  Both renderings  are valid witeiin  the context  of the 
narrative.
355. This is simply  a younger  relative  from Aguten-intdd's  mother  side. . 
C^ice  you are rdated  witii  a person  in African  culture,  genealogically  
spealdng,  yotfare  a "brother"  of a "sister"  of the person  to whom  you 
AIWTGlAtea.
356. means  "Death-is-in-home,"  or "Death-is4n-the-house."
357. This  is an obvious  way in which  Fagunwa  celebrates  tiie almig^tiness
167






of God over the power  of Satan  and followers.  In this sense,  he is 
Miltcmc,  for he tries  to show  God*s  ultunate  control  over  the oreation  just 
in file same  way  Milton  in  his  great  epic  Paradise  £a$f  demonstrates  God's  
power  over  Satan  in casting  hhn  out of heaven.  Sw Bua<&e  Lostl.
353. Nigeria  was still using  pound  sterling  at foe time  Fagunwa  wrote  this 
novel.  Twelve  pence  made  one  shillings,  and  twenty  killings  made  one 
pound  (12d x 1/.; 20/-  x £1). This  is a pronounced  fantastic  aspect  of 
Fagunwa's  narrative.
359. i.e., "in foe evening  time."
360. Meaning  "accident."
361. Meaning  literally,  "lean  head."  In other  contexts,  Foriti could  mean  "to 
endure"  or "t6 persevere/'
362. prun  nene  is also translated  "paradise."
363. T^mi~rukan  literally  means  "mine-alone."
364. This is both Biblical  as well as Miltonic:  it is also  'Fagunwa's  way of 
explaining  moral-brokenness  in-foe  world.  Notice  that-foe  "fall"  
originated  from  foe seven  women.  Compare  this wifo  Gen.  3:1-20  and 
Paradise  LostN,  IJ, 5-150.
365. The word translated  "bitterness"  is ewdro.  Its ‘botanical  nkme  is 
Venania  atnygdalia.  Its leaves  are very  bitter;-so  are foe  tqots,  which  are 
also used  as chewing-sticks  which  clean  teeth  fold kill germs  as well.  
The leaves  are also  used  for food,  wifo  proper  treatment.  'Thus  I have  
taken  foe liberty  to translate  its idea,  here,  for ewdro  is naturally  bitter .
366. Literally,  "Downward-sorrow."
367. Or integrity.
368. Literally,  "where  you  tell another  thing. .," but  foe  English  grammatical  
structure  does  not allow  such translation,  since  you have to mention  
"one thing"  before  "another  thing,"  and not foe latter before  the
369. Liter^y,  igbd means  "calabash,"  butfoe  semantics  of that  word  within  
foe ccmtext  does  not  lie in foe object:  it is simply  used  as a metaphor  to 
portray  foe cumbersomeness  of foe immoral  act of conspiracy  it^lf;  
thus  foe word  "load"  serves  that  purpose  very  well.
370. Or "from  them."
371. i.Oy "Baba-Onirungbon-yeuke  was  a nice  person  indeed."
372. A typiral  Yoruba  food foat is prepared  wifo yam flour  wifo boiling  
water;  it.is prepared  foe same  way  as mashed  potatoes.
373. In foe Yoruba  tradition,  one  must  not eat wifo  one's  left hand.  Thus  it 
is a "bank"  for something  one wants  to preserve.
374. i.e., £1,000.00  pounds,  sterling.
375. i^ddgdn  is a "space  of seventeen  days;"  a day  when  a ritual  is usually  
performed,  and animals  slau^tered  for sacrifice.  This illustrates  an 
enemy's  advice.  See A Dictionary  of the Yoruba  Language.  Ibadan:  
University  Press  Limited.  1982.
376. This  is a proverb  which  means  that  foe villain  who  would  do one in, so 
168






to speak,  lives  in the house  right  there  with  one,  or near  one's  home,  hi 
other  words,  the very  person  you  know  and  loVe,  may  turn  around  and 
hurt  you.
377. i.e.. If your  own  people  inyour  home  or those  who  know  youiritimately  
do not  give  you  up into  the  hands  of the enemy/those  who  are outside,  
that  is, those  you  do not know  would  not be able te hurt  you.  In oflier  
words,  your  own  death  is right  there  in your  home.
378. i.e., "very  intimately.''
379. Fagunwa's  verbal  gymnastics  is seen  in this metaphorical  hyperbole;  
"laughter  weds  lau^ter"  is his way  of saying  that  ’'we were  so happy  
when  we met,  we were  talking  and we were  laughing  so hard ..."
380. Literally,  "they  would  be looking  at others  with  little  eyes."
381. Fagunwa  tries to give the reader  a hint about  the structure  of his 
narrative.  It is very  complex;  the story  is told  from  the first  person  point  
of view,  except  that it is being  reported  through  the third  person.  The 
dominating  point  of view  of the story,  however,  is the first  person.  This  
is what  is known  as oblique  narrative.
382. Fagunwa  gives  us his rationale  for file story;  he releases  his intent  for 
his literary  undertaking.  This shows  that  didacticism  is not accidental  
a residue  of his naivete  in his works,  but an accomplishment  of a 
purpose.  His basic  purpose  is to teach  — to teach  delightfully  fiirough  
the verbal  gymnastics  and dazzling  rhetoric  —a vehicle  which  conveys  
the reader  so smoothly  that he forgets  the pain  of the bumpy  road  of 
"sermons"  and proverbs  that are intended  to teach  morals.  Thus  in 
spite of the modem  reader's  resentment,  he is lured  to read along  by 
Fagunwa's  rhetorical  prowess.
383. Notice  Fagunwa's  theological  diction  here as well as his consistent  
Biblical  language  throughout  the  narrative.  Fagunwa's  Judeo-Christian  
concept  and beliefs  filter  through  his works  of art. As amatter  of fact,  
the art to him, is simply  a means  to an end,  not an end itself.  True  art 
is meant  to pleasingly  teach,  a notion  which  had been  a part of the 
philosophy  of literary  art for centuries.  See Wilbur  Scott/,Fz've  
Approaches  of  Literary  Criticism!  An Arrangement  of  Contemporaiy  E^ys  (New  York:  Collier  Books,  1962),  pp. -41.
384. In other  words,  'he disappeared."
385. The  elderly  peojfle  have  accummulated  fiie wisdom  from  other  people  
in their experiences  in life, to the extent  that they themsdves  have  
become  wise;  thus  are no fools.
386. See  .Matthew  5:37 for this biblical  allusion.
387. i.e., "daily  bread."
388. This  term,'  is simply  an idiophonic  expression.  There  is no
such  bird  in existence,  for all we know.  This  convinces  the reader-fiiat
' this epilogue  is basically  for file school  children.'  It sounds  like the 
end-of-the-term  sermonette.
389. This  prayer  is for the polygamous  family,  where  there  is always  bitter  
rivaliy  between  two  wives,-or  among  many  wives  of the same  husband.
169






Bibliography
Primary  Sources
Novels:  Fagunwa's  Works
Fagunwa,  D.O.  Adiitu  O16dumare.  Edinburgh:  Nelson,  1961.
__________ Igbd  OI6ditmare.  Edinburgh:  Nelson,  1949.
--------------- ^gb6ju  Odeidaii  IgbdlrurtmoleVdirioyxt^-.  Nelson,  1950.  (Lagos  
CMS,  1938).
Oiiibudd.  Edinburgh:  Nelson,  1949.
irinkerindonimi  Igbo  Eldgbeje.  Edinburgh:  Nelson,  1954.
"Other  Publicati  ons
Fagunwa,  D.O.  att Ajad^  Asiyan  itdp,  ed. By Fagunwa,  et al. Edinburtdi:
Nelson,  1959.
Fagunyva,  D.O. and L.J. Lewis.  Aldyd  fdn Akekg  idpa LEo Iwd "Tdgvo  id
Kdldndd."  Landen:  Oxford  University  Press,  19^  (readier's  Mammal).
Fagunwa,  D.O.  innajo{Npa.Tfjm,'Ajpa  keji).  London:  Oxford  University  press,  
, 1954«
 ed. ititn  O16yin.  Oxford  University  Press,  1954.
Fagunwa,  D.O. and G.L. Laosebikan. ,4spian  (Iwe Kini).  London:  
Heinemann  Educational  Book-Ltd.,  1964.
Fagunwa,  D.O. and G.L. Laosebikan,  0/6 Asbtan  (Iwe Kini), London:  
Heinemann  Educational  Books  Ltd.,  1964.
Fagunwa,  D.O.  and  L.J. Lewis.  TdfwoitiKdhinde.  London:  Oxford  University  
Press,  1949.
Books  about  Fagunwa's  Works
Bamgbose,  Ayo. The  Novels  td  D.O.  Pa^wa.  Benin  City:  Ethiope  Publishing  
Corporaticrv  1973.Secondary  Sources
Translations  of  Fagunwa's  Novels
Akinwowo,  A.A. The  Beginning  of Olowo-Aiye,^'  die  Translaticm  of chapter  
1 of Olodtunare,  ODU:  A Journal  of Yoruba,  Edo  and  Related  
Studies  No. 9 (1963),  35-37.
Beier, UUi and B, Gbadamosi.  "The-  Beginning  of Olowo  Aiye: Opening  
Chapter  of Igbo Olodumare."  ODU;  Journal  of Yoruba,  Edo and 
Related  Studies.No . 9 (1963),  31-34.
Soywdea,  Wole.  Trans.  The  Forest  of a Thousand  Demons;  A Hunter's  Saga.  
By D.O.  Fagunwa,  London:  Nelson,  1968.
170






.Articles  about  Fagiuiwa's  Works
Afolayan,  A. "Language  and Sources  of Amos  Tutuola."  In C. Heywood,  ed. 
Perspectives  on African  Literature.  London:  Heinemann,  1967,  pp. 
49-63.
Beier, Ulli. "D.O.'Fagunwa:  A Yoruba  Novelist."  In Ulli Beier, ed. 
Introduction  to African  Literature:  London:  Longmans,  1967, pp. 
188-195.
Irele, Abiola.  "Tradition  and the Yoruba  Writer:  D.O. Fagunwa,  Amos  
Tutuola  and  Wole  Soyinka."  ODU:  Journal  ofWest  African  Studies,  
No. 11 (January  1975),  75-100.  ''
Lawson  Olaseinde.  "In Search  of Peace  ... Lamgbodo.^'  Drum  (1977),  28-29.  
(Stage  adaptation  of story  by Fagunwa.)
Lindfors,  Bernth.  "Amos  Tutuola  and D.O. Fagunwa."  Jourxxal  of 
Commonwealth  Literature,  No. 9 (n.d.),  57-65.
"Form,  Theme,  and Style  in the Narratives  of D.O.  Fagunwa."  
International  Fiction  Review,  6 (1979),  11-17.
____________"Oral  Tradition  and the Individual  Literary  Talent."  Studies  in 
die Novel.  Special  number  Commonwealth  Novel,  Vol. 4, No. 2 
Summer  (1972).
Noble,  R.W.  "Demons  and  Women."  WestAfrica,  Vol.  6 (Sept.  1969),  1956-57.  
(A Review  of The Forest  of a Thousand  Demons  by D.O. Fagunwa  
translated  by Wole  Soyinka.)
Ogundipe-Leslie,  Omolara.  "The  Poetics  of Fiction  by Yoruba  Writers:  The 
Case  of Ogboju  Odeninu  Igbo  Irunmale.  ODU;  A Journal  of West  
African  StudiesFievr  Series,  No. 16 (July  1977),  85-95.
Other  Sources  Cited
Abraham,  R.C.  Dictionary  of Modem  Yoruba,London:.  University  of London  
Press,  1966.
Adetugbo,  Abiodun.  "The  Yoruba  Language  in Yoruba  History."  In Sources  
of Yoruba  History.  Ed. S.O. Biobaku,  London:  Oxford  University  
Press,  1966.
Babalola,  S.A. The Content  and Form of Yoruba  Ijala. London:  Oxford  
University  Press,  1962.
Corbett,  Edward  P.J. Classical  Rhetoric  for Modem  Student.  2nd ed. New  
York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1971.
Elliot,  TS. "Tradition  and the Individual  Talent."  hx-Critidsm;  The Major  
Texts. Engled  ed. Ed. W.J. Bate. New York: Harcourt  Brace  
Jovanovich,  Inc.,  1970.
Fadipe,  N.  A. The  Sociology  of  Yoruba.  Ed.  by Francis  Olu  Okediji  and  Oladejo  
Okediji.  Ibadan:  University  of Ibadan  Press,  1970.
Gerard,  Albert  S. Ahican  Language  Literature:  An Introduction  to die 
History  of Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Washington,  D.C.:  Three  Continent  
Press,  1981.
171






Hair, P.E.H. The Early  Studies  of Nigerian  Languages.  Cambridge:  
Cambridge  University  Press,  1967.  °
Harrey,  Van A. A handbook  of Theological  Terms:  Their  Ifleanings  and 
Background.  New  York:  Macmillan  Publishing  Co., Inc., 1964.
Idowu,  Bolaji.  Olodumare:  Godin  Yoruba  Belief.  London:  Oxford  University  
Press,  1966.
Newmark,  Peter.  Approaches  to Translation.  London:  Pergamon  Press  Ltd.,  
1981.
Owomoyela,  ‘ Oyekan.  African  Literatures:  An Introduction.  Waltham:  
Crossroads  Press,  1979.
Rowlands,  E.C. Teach Yourself  Yoruba;  London:  The English  Universities  
Press  Ltd., 1969.
Scott,  Wilbur.  Five  Approaches  of Literary  Criticism:  An Arrangement  of 
Contemporary  Essays.  New  York:  Collier  Books,  1962.
Thoreau,  Henry  David.-  "Walden,"  in The American  Tradition  in Literature.  
Vol. 1., Ed. Sculley  Bradley  et al. 4th ed. New  York:  Grosset  and 
Dunlap,  1974.
172












<6
Forest  of God is Gabriel  Ajadi ’s English  translation  of th6 
Voruba  classic novel, Igbo Olodiimare,  written  by D.O. 
Fagunwa.
Olowoaiye  sets out on his epic  journey  tQ the Forest  of God,  
to prove  hims'elf  as a powerful  hunter,  who wants  to become  
deeper  in wisdom,  and greater  m power.  He there  confronts  
gnomes,  and several  weird and supernatural  creatures.  
Survival  is his only choice, and that depends  on how 
supematurally  powerful  and how wise, he too is.
Gabriel  Ajadi ’s powerful  English  translation  o this 
allegorical  novel is unique-  the conventional  theories  of 
translation  are carefully  blended,  the'style  is that of a very  
competent*  and resilient  user of the English  language,  and 
the Introduction  Annotation  and relevant  Bibliography  
supplied  by the translator,  ensuce  that readers,  whether  
with or without  the traditiona'  and lingua  bacl^round  of 
the original  author,  D.O. Fagunwa,  fully  grasp  and enjoy  the 
stofy.
e
AGBO  AREO  PUBLISHERS  
ISBN 978-32771-1-1
Printed  at: Unilorin  Press, University  ot Ilorin,  Borin,  Nigeria






